PART II
CHAPTER I
So he lay a very long while. Now and then he seemed to wake up, and atsuch moments he noticed that it was far into the night, but it did notoccur to him to get up. At last he noticed that it was beginning to getlight. He was lying on his back, still dazed from his recent oblivion.Fearful, despairing cries rose shrilly from the street, sounds which heheard every night, indeed, under his window after two o’clock. They wokehim up now.
“Ah! the drunken men are coming out of the taverns,” he thought, “it’spast two o’clock,” and at once he leaped up, as though someone hadpulled him from the sofa.
“What! Past two o’clock!”
He sat down on the sofa--and instantly recollected everything! All atonce, in one flash, he recollected everything.
For the first moment he thought he was going mad. A dreadful chill cameover him; but the chill was from the fever that had begun long before inhis sleep. Now he was suddenly taken with violent shivering, so that histeeth chattered and all his limbs were shaking. He opened the door andbegan listening--everything in the house was asleep. With amazement hegazed at himself and everything in the room around him, wondering how hecould have come in the night before without fastening the door, and haveflung himself on the sofa without undressing, without even taking hishat off. It had fallen off and was lying on the floor near his pillow.
“If anyone had come in, what would he have thought? That I’m drunkbut...”
He rushed to the window. There was light enough, and he began hurriedlylooking himself all over from head to foot, all his clothes; were thereno traces? But there was no doing it like that; shivering with cold, hebegan taking off everything and looking over again. He turned everythingover to the last threads and rags, and mistrusting himself, went throughhis search three times.
But there seemed to be nothing, no trace, except in one place, wheresome thick drops of congealed blood were clinging to the frayed edgeof his trousers. He picked up a big claspknife and cut off the frayedthreads. There seemed to be nothing more.
Suddenly he remembered that the purse and the things he had taken out ofthe old woman’s box were still in his pockets! He had not thought tillthen of taking them out and hiding them! He had not even thought of themwhile he was examining his clothes! What next? Instantly he rushedto take them out and fling them on the table. When he had pulled outeverything, and turned the pocket inside out to be sure there wasnothing left, he carried the whole heap to the corner. The paper hadcome off the bottom of the wall and hung there in tatters. He beganstuffing all the things into the hole under the paper: “They’re in! Allout of sight, and the purse too!” he thought gleefully, getting up andgazing blankly at the hole which bulged out more than ever. Suddenlyhe shuddered all over with horror; “My God!” he whispered in despair:“what’s the matter with me? Is that hidden? Is that the way to hidethings?”
He had not reckoned on having trinkets to hide. He had only thought ofmoney, and so had not prepared a hiding-place.
“But now, now, what am I glad of?” he thought, “Is that hiding things?My reason’s deserting me--simply!”
He sat down on the sofa in exhaustion and was at once shaken by anotherunbearable fit of shivering. Mechanically he drew from a chair besidehim his old student’s winter coat, which was still warm though almost inrags, covered himself up with it and once more sank into drowsiness anddelirium. He lost consciousness.
Not more than five minutes had passed when he jumped up a second time,and at once pounced in a frenzy on his clothes again.
“How could I go to sleep again with nothing done? Yes, yes; I have nottaken the loop off the armhole! I forgot it, forgot a thing like that!Such a piece of evidence!”
He pulled off the noose, hurriedly cut it to pieces and threw the bitsamong his linen under the pillow.
“Pieces of torn linen couldn’t rouse suspicion, whatever happened; Ithink not, I think not, any way!” he repeated, standing in the middleof the room, and with painful concentration he fell to gazing abouthim again, at the floor and everywhere, trying to make sure he had notforgotten anything. The conviction that all his faculties, even memory,and the simplest power of reflection were failing him, began to be aninsufferable torture.
“Surely it isn’t beginning already! Surely it isn’t my punishment comingupon me? It is!”
The frayed rags he had cut off his trousers were actually lying on thefloor in the middle of the room, where anyone coming in would see them!
“What is the matter with me!” he cried again, like one distraught.
Then a strange idea entered his head; that, perhaps, all his clotheswere covered with blood, that, perhaps, there were a great manystains, but that he did not see them, did not notice them becausehis perceptions were failing, were going to pieces... his reason wasclouded.... Suddenly he remembered that there had been blood on thepurse too. “Ah! Then there must be blood on the pocket too, for I putthe wet purse in my pocket!”
In a flash he had turned the pocket inside out and, yes!--there weretraces, stains on the lining of the pocket!
“So my reason has not quite deserted me, so I still have some sense andmemory, since I guessed it of myself,” he thought triumphantly, witha deep sigh of relief; “it’s simply the weakness of fever, a moment’sdelirium,” and he tore the whole lining out of the left pocket of histrousers. At that instant the sunlight fell on his left boot; on thesock which poked out from the boot, he fancied there were traces! Heflung off his boots; “traces indeed! The tip of the sock was soaked withblood;” he must have unwarily stepped into that pool.... “But what am Ito do with this now? Where am I to put the sock and rags and pocket?”
He gathered them all up in his hands and stood in the middle of theroom.
“In the stove? But they would ransack the stove first of all. Burn them?But what can I burn them with? There are no matches even. No, bettergo out and throw it all away somewhere. Yes, better throw it away,” herepeated, sitting down on the sofa again, “and at once, this minute,without lingering...”
But his head sank on the pillow instead. Again the unbearable icyshivering came over him; again he drew his coat over him.
And for a long while, for some hours, he was haunted by the impulse to“go off somewhere at once, this moment, and fling it all away, so thatit may be out of sight and done with, at once, at once!” Several timeshe tried to rise from the sofa, but could not.
He was thoroughly waked up at last by a violent knocking at his door.
“Open, do, are you dead or alive? He keeps sleeping here!” shoutedNastasya, banging with her fist on the door. “For whole days togetherhe’s snoring here like a dog! A dog he is too. Open I tell you. It’spast ten.”
“Maybe he’s not at home,” said a man’s voice.
“Ha! that’s the porter’s voice.... What does he want?”
He jumped up and sat on the sofa. The beating of his heart was apositive pain.
“Then who can have latched the door?” retorted Nastasya. “He’s taken tobolting himself in! As if he were worth stealing! Open, you stupid, wakeup!”
“What do they want? Why the porter? All’s discovered. Resist or open?Come what may!...”
He half rose, stooped forward and unlatched the door.
His room was so small that he could undo the latch without leaving thebed. Yes; the porter and Nastasya were standing there.
Nastasya stared at him in a strange way. He glanced with a defiant anddesperate air at the porter, who without a word held out a grey foldedpaper sealed with bottle-wax.
“A notice from the office,” he announced, as he gave him the paper.
“From what office?”
“A summons to the police office, of course. You know which office.”
“To the police?... What for?...”
“How can I tell? You’re sent for, so you go.”
The man looked at him attentively, looked round the room and turned togo away.
“He’s downright ill!” observed Nastasya, not taking her eyes off him.The porter turned his head for a moment. “He’s been in a fever sinceyesterday,” she added.
Raskolnikov made no response and held the paper in his hands, withoutopening it. “Don’t you get up then,” Nastasya went on compassionately,seeing that he was letting his feet down from the sofa. “You’re ill, andso don’t go; there’s no such hurry. What have you got there?”
He looked; in his right hand he held the shreds he had cut from histrousers, the sock, and the rags of the pocket. So he had been asleepwith them in his hand. Afterwards reflecting upon it, he remembered thathalf waking up in his fever, he had grasped all this tightly in his handand so fallen asleep again.
“Look at the rags he’s collected and sleeps with them, as though he hasgot hold of a treasure...”
And Nastasya went off into her hysterical giggle.
Instantly he thrust them all under his great coat and fixed hiseyes intently upon her. Far as he was from being capable of rationalreflection at that moment, he felt that no one would behave like thatwith a person who was going to be arrested. “But... the police?”
“You’d better have some tea! Yes? I’ll bring it, there’s some left.”
“No... I’m going; I’ll go at once,” he muttered, getting on to his feet.
“Why, you’ll never get downstairs!”
“Yes, I’ll go.”
“As you please.”
She followed the porter out.
At once he rushed to the light to examine the sock and the rags.
“There are stains, but not very noticeable; all covered with dirt,and rubbed and already discoloured. No one who had no suspicion coulddistinguish anything. Nastasya from a distance could not have noticed,thank God!” Then with a tremor he broke the seal of the notice and beganreading; he was a long while reading, before he understood. It was anordinary summons from the district police-station to appear that day athalf-past nine at the office of the district superintendent.
“But when has such a thing happened? I never have anything to do withthe police! And why just to-day?” he thought in agonising bewilderment.“Good God, only get it over soon!”
He was flinging himself on his knees to pray, but broke intolaughter--not at the idea of prayer, but at himself.
He began, hurriedly dressing. “If I’m lost, I am lost, I don’t care!Shall I put the sock on?” he suddenly wondered, “it will get dustierstill and the traces will be gone.”
But no sooner had he put it on than he pulled it off again in loathingand horror. He pulled it off, but reflecting that he had no other socks,he picked it up and put it on again--and again he laughed.
“That’s all conventional, that’s all relative, merely a way of lookingat it,” he thought in a flash, but only on the top surface of hismind, while he was shuddering all over, “there, I’ve got it on! I havefinished by getting it on!”
But his laughter was quickly followed by despair.
“No, it’s too much for me...” he thought. His legs shook. “From fear,”he muttered. His head swam and ached with fever. “It’s a trick! Theywant to decoy me there and confound me over everything,” he mused, ashe went out on to the stairs--“the worst of it is I’m almostlight-headed... I may blurt out something stupid...”
On the stairs he remembered that he was leaving all the things just asthey were in the hole in the wall, “and very likely, it’s on purposeto search when I’m out,” he thought, and stopped short. But he waspossessed by such despair, such cynicism of misery, if one may so callit, that with a wave of his hand he went on. “Only to get it over!”
In the street the heat was insufferable again; not a drop of rain hadfallen all those days. Again dust, bricks and mortar, again the stenchfrom the shops and pot-houses, again the drunken men, the Finnishpedlars and half-broken-down cabs. The sun shone straight in his eyes,so that it hurt him to look out of them, and he felt his head goinground--as a man in a fever is apt to feel when he comes out into thestreet on a bright sunny day.
When he reached the turning into _the_ street, in an agony oftrepidation he looked down it... at _the_ house... and at once avertedhis eyes.
“If they question me, perhaps I’ll simply tell,” he thought, as he drewnear the police-station.
The police-station was about a quarter of a mile off. It had lately beenmoved to new rooms on the fourth floor of a new house. He had been oncefor a moment in the old office but long ago. Turning in at the gateway,he saw on the right a flight of stairs which a peasant was mounting witha book in his hand. “A house-porter, no doubt; so then, the office ishere,” and he began ascending the stairs on the chance. He did not wantto ask questions of anyone.
“I’ll go in, fall on my knees, and confess everything...” he thought, ashe reached the fourth floor.
The staircase was steep, narrow and all sloppy with dirty water. Thekitchens of the flats opened on to the stairs and stood open almostthe whole day. So there was a fearful smell and heat. The staircasewas crowded with porters going up and down with their books under theirarms, policemen, and persons of all sorts and both sexes. The door ofthe office, too, stood wide open. Peasants stood waiting within. There,too, the heat was stifling and there was a sickening smell of freshpaint and stale oil from the newly decorated rooms.
After waiting a little, he decided to move forward into the next room.All the rooms were small and low-pitched. A fearful impatience drew himon and on. No one paid attention to him. In the second room someclerks sat writing, dressed hardly better than he was, and rather aqueer-looking set. He went up to one of them.
“What is it?”
He showed the notice he had received.
“You are a student?” the man asked, glancing at the notice.
“Yes, formerly a student.”
The clerk looked at him, but without the slightest interest. He was aparticularly unkempt person with the look of a fixed idea in his eye.
“There would be no getting anything out of him, because he has nointerest in anything,” thought Raskolnikov.
“Go in there to the head clerk,” said the clerk, pointing towards thefurthest room.
He went into that room--the fourth in order; it was a small room andpacked full of people, rather better dressed than in the outer rooms.Among them were two ladies. One, poorly dressed in mourning, sat at thetable opposite the chief clerk, writing something at his dictation.The other, a very stout, buxom woman with a purplish-red, blotchy face,excessively smartly dressed with a brooch on her bosom as big as asaucer, was standing on one side, apparently waiting for something.Raskolnikov thrust his notice upon the head clerk. The latter glancedat it, said: “Wait a minute,” and went on attending to the lady inmourning.
He breathed more freely. “It can’t be that!”
By degrees he began to regain confidence, he kept urging himself to havecourage and be calm.
“Some foolishness, some trifling carelessness, and I may betray myself!Hm... it’s a pity there’s no air here,” he added, “it’s stifling.... Itmakes one’s head dizzier than ever... and one’s mind too...”
He was conscious of a terrible inner turmoil. He was afraid of losinghis self-control; he tried to catch at something and fix his mind on it,something quite irrelevant, but he could not succeed in this at all. Yetthe head clerk greatly interested him, he kept hoping to see through himand guess something from his face.
He was a very young man, about two and twenty, with a dark mobileface that looked older than his years. He was fashionably dressed andfoppish, with his hair parted in the middle, well combed and pomaded,and wore a number of rings on his well-scrubbed fingers and a gold chainon his waistcoat. He said a couple of words in French to a foreigner whowas in the room, and said them fairly correctly.
“Luise Ivanovna, you can sit down,” he said casually to thegaily-dressed, purple-faced lady, who was still standing as though notventuring to sit down, though there was a chair beside her.
“Ich danke,” said the latter, and softly, with a rustle of silk she sankinto the chair. Her light blue dress trimmed with white lace floatedabout the table like an air-balloon and filled almost half the room. Shesmelt of scent. But she was obviously embarrassed at filling halfthe room and smelling so strongly of scent; and though her smile wasimpudent as well as cringing, it betrayed evident uneasiness.
The lady in mourning had done at last, and got up. All at once, withsome noise, an officer walked in very jauntily, with a peculiar swing ofhis shoulders at each step. He tossed his cockaded cap on the table andsat down in an easy-chair. The small lady positively skipped from herseat on seeing him, and fell to curtsying in a sort of ecstasy; but theofficer took not the smallest notice of her, and she did not venture tosit down again in his presence. He was the assistant superintendent. Hehad a reddish moustache that stood out horizontally on each side of hisface, and extremely small features, expressive of nothing much excepta certain insolence. He looked askance and rather indignantly atRaskolnikov; he was so very badly dressed, and in spite of hishumiliating position, his bearing was by no means in keeping with hisclothes. Raskolnikov had unwarily fixed a very long and direct look onhim, so that he felt positively affronted.
“What do you want?” he shouted, apparently astonished that such a raggedfellow was not annihilated by the majesty of his glance.
“I was summoned... by a notice...” Raskolnikov faltered.
“For the recovery of money due, from _the student_,” the head clerkinterfered hurriedly, tearing himself from his papers. “Here!” and heflung Raskolnikov a document and pointed out the place. “Read that!”
“Money? What money?” thought Raskolnikov, “but... then... it’s certainlynot _that_.”
And he trembled with joy. He felt sudden intense indescribable relief. Aload was lifted from his back.
“And pray, what time were you directed to appear, sir?” shouted theassistant superintendent, seeming for some unknown reason more and moreaggrieved. “You are told to come at nine, and now it’s twelve!”
“The notice was only brought me a quarter of an hour ago,” Raskolnikovanswered loudly over his shoulder. To his own surprise he, too, grewsuddenly angry and found a certain pleasure in it. “And it’s enough thatI have come here ill with fever.”
“Kindly refrain from shouting!”
“I’m not shouting, I’m speaking very quietly, it’s you who are shoutingat me. I’m a student, and allow no one to shout at me.”
The assistant superintendent was so furious that for the first minute hecould only splutter inarticulately. He leaped up from his seat.
“Be silent! You are in a government office. Don’t be impudent, sir!”
“You’re in a government office, too,” cried Raskolnikov, “and you’resmoking a cigarette as well as shouting, so you are showing disrespectto all of us.”
He felt an indescribable satisfaction at having said this.
The head clerk looked at him with a smile. The angry assistantsuperintendent was obviously disconcerted.
“That’s not your business!” he shouted at last with unnatural loudness.“Kindly make the declaration demanded of you. Show him. AlexandrGrigorievitch. There is a complaint against you! You don’t pay yourdebts! You’re a fine bird!”
But Raskolnikov was not listening now; he had eagerly clutched at thepaper, in haste to find an explanation. He read it once, and a secondtime, and still did not understand.
“What is this?” he asked the head clerk.
“It is for the recovery of money on an I O U, a writ. You musteither pay it, with all expenses, costs and so on, or give a writtendeclaration when you can pay it, and at the same time an undertaking notto leave the capital without payment, and nor to sell or conceal yourproperty. The creditor is at liberty to sell your property, and proceedagainst you according to the law.”
“But I... am not in debt to anyone!”
“That’s not our business. Here, an I O U for a hundred and fifteenroubles, legally attested, and due for payment, has been brought usfor recovery, given by you to the widow of the assessor Zarnitsyn, ninemonths ago, and paid over by the widow Zarnitsyn to one Mr. Tchebarov.We therefore summon you, hereupon.”
“But she is my landlady!”
“And what if she is your landlady?”
The head clerk looked at him with a condescending smile of compassion,and at the same time with a certain triumph, as at a novice under firefor the first time--as though he would say: “Well, how do you feel now?”But what did he care now for an I O U, for a writ of recovery! Was thatworth worrying about now, was it worth attention even! He stood, heread, he listened, he answered, he even asked questions himself, butall mechanically. The triumphant sense of security, of deliverance fromoverwhelming danger, that was what filled his whole soul that momentwithout thought for the future, without analysis, without suppositionsor surmises, without doubts and without questioning. It was an instantof full, direct, purely instinctive joy. But at that very momentsomething like a thunderstorm took place in the office. The assistantsuperintendent, still shaken by Raskolnikov’s disrespect, still fumingand obviously anxious to keep up his wounded dignity, pounced on theunfortunate smart lady, who had been gazing at him ever since he came inwith an exceedingly silly smile.
“You shameful hussy!” he shouted suddenly at the top of his voice. (Thelady in mourning had left the office.) “What was going on at your houselast night? Eh! A disgrace again, you’re a scandal to the whole street.Fighting and drinking again. Do you want the house of correction? Why,I have warned you ten times over that I would not let you off theeleventh! And here you are again, again, you... you...!”
The paper fell out of Raskolnikov’s hands, and he looked wildly at thesmart lady who was so unceremoniously treated. But he soon saw what itmeant, and at once began to find positive amusement in the scandal. Helistened with pleasure, so that he longed to laugh and laugh... all hisnerves were on edge.
“Ilya Petrovitch!” the head clerk was beginning anxiously, but stoppedshort, for he knew from experience that the enraged assistant could notbe stopped except by force.
As for the smart lady, at first she positively trembled before thestorm. But, strange to say, the more numerous and violent the terms ofabuse became, the more amiable she looked, and the more seductive thesmiles she lavished on the terrible assistant. She moved uneasily, andcurtsied incessantly, waiting impatiently for a chance of putting in herword: and at last she found it.
“There was no sort of noise or fighting in my house, Mr. Captain,” shepattered all at once, like peas dropping, speaking Russian confidently,though with a strong German accent, “and no sort of scandal, and hishonour came drunk, and it’s the whole truth I am telling, Mr. Captain,and I am not to blame.... Mine is an honourable house, Mr. Captain,and honourable behaviour, Mr. Captain, and I always, always dislike anyscandal myself. But he came quite tipsy, and asked for three bottlesagain, and then he lifted up one leg, and began playing the pianofortewith one foot, and that is not at all right in an honourable house, andhe _ganz_ broke the piano, and it was very bad manners indeed and I saidso. And he took up a bottle and began hitting everyone with it. And thenI called the porter, and Karl came, and he took Karl and hit him in theeye; and he hit Henriette in the eye, too, and gave me five slaps on thecheek. And it was so ungentlemanly in an honourable house, Mr. Captain,and I screamed. And he opened the window over the canal, and stood inthe window, squealing like a little pig; it was a disgrace. The idea ofsquealing like a little pig at the window into the street! Fie upon him!And Karl pulled him away from the window by his coat, and it is true,Mr. Captain, he tore _sein rock_. And then he shouted that _man muss_pay him fifteen roubles damages. And I did pay him, Mr. Captain, fiveroubles for _sein rock_. And he is an ungentlemanly visitor and causedall the scandal. ‘I will show you up,’ he said, ‘for I can write to allthe papers about you.’”
“Then he was an author?”
“Yes, Mr. Captain, and what an ungentlemanly visitor in an honourablehouse....”
“Now then! Enough! I have told you already...”
“Ilya Petrovitch!” the head clerk repeated significantly.
The assistant glanced rapidly at him; the head clerk slightly shook hishead.
“... So I tell you this, most respectable Luise Ivanovna, and I tell ityou for the last time,” the assistant went on. “If there is a scandalin your honourable house once again, I will put you yourself in thelock-up, as it is called in polite society. Do you hear? So a literaryman, an author took five roubles for his coat-tail in an ‘honourablehouse’? A nice set, these authors!”
And he cast a contemptuous glance at Raskolnikov. “There was a scandalthe other day in a restaurant, too. An author had eaten his dinner andwould not pay; ‘I’ll write a satire on you,’ says he. And there wasanother of them on a steamer last week used the most disgracefullanguage to the respectable family of a civil councillor, his wife anddaughter. And there was one of them turned out of a confectioner’s shopthe other day. They are like that, authors, literary men, students,town-criers.... Pfoo! You get along! I shall look in upon you myself oneday. Then you had better be careful! Do you hear?”
With hurried deference, Luise Ivanovna fell to curtsying in alldirections, and so curtsied herself to the door. But at the door, shestumbled backwards against a good-looking officer with a fresh, openface and splendid thick fair whiskers. This was the superintendent ofthe district himself, Nikodim Fomitch. Luise Ivanovna made hasteto curtsy almost to the ground, and with mincing little steps, shefluttered out of the office.
“Again thunder and lightning--a hurricane!” said Nikodim Fomitch to IlyaPetrovitch in a civil and friendly tone. “You are aroused again, you arefuming again! I heard it on the stairs!”
“Well, what then!” Ilya Petrovitch drawled with gentlemanly nonchalance;and he walked with some papers to another table, with a jaunty swing ofhis shoulders at each step. “Here, if you will kindly look: an author,or a student, has been one at least, does not pay his debts, has givenan I O U, won’t clear out of his room, and complaints are constantlybeing lodged against him, and here he has been pleased to make a protestagainst my smoking in his presence! He behaves like a cad himself, andjust look at him, please. Here’s the gentleman, and very attractive heis!”
“Poverty is not a vice, my friend, but we know you go off like powder,you can’t bear a slight, I daresay you took offence at something andwent too far yourself,” continued Nikodim Fomitch, turning affably toRaskolnikov. “But you were wrong there; he is a capital fellow, I assureyou, but explosive, explosive! He gets hot, fires up, boils over, and nostopping him! And then it’s all over! And at the bottom he’s a heart ofgold! His nickname in the regiment was the Explosive Lieutenant....”
“And what a regiment it was, too,” cried Ilya Petrovitch, much gratifiedat this agreeable banter, though still sulky.
Raskolnikov had a sudden desire to say something exceptionally pleasantto them all. “Excuse me, Captain,” he began easily, suddenly addressingNikodim Fomitch, “will you enter into my position?... I am ready toask pardon, if I have been ill-mannered. I am a poor student, sickand shattered (shattered was the word he used) by poverty. I am notstudying, because I cannot keep myself now, but I shall get money.... Ihave a mother and sister in the province of X. They will send it tome, and I will pay. My landlady is a good-hearted woman, but she is soexasperated at my having lost my lessons, and not paying her for thelast four months, that she does not even send up my dinner... and Idon’t understand this I O U at all. She is asking me to pay her on thisI O U. How am I to pay her? Judge for yourselves!...”
“But that is not our business, you know,” the head clerk was observing.
“Yes, yes. I perfectly agree with you. But allow me to explain...”Raskolnikov put in again, still addressing Nikodim Fomitch, but tryinghis best to address Ilya Petrovitch also, though the latter persistentlyappeared to be rummaging among his papers and to be contemptuouslyoblivious of him. “Allow me to explain that I have been living with herfor nearly three years and at first... at first... for why should I notconfess it, at the very beginning I promised to marry her daughter, itwas a verbal promise, freely given... she was a girl... indeed, I likedher, though I was not in love with her... a youthful affair in fact...that is, I mean to say, that my landlady gave me credit freely in thosedays, and I led a life of... I was very heedless...”
“Nobody asks you for these personal details, sir, we’ve no time towaste,” Ilya Petrovitch interposed roughly and with a note of triumph;but Raskolnikov stopped him hotly, though he suddenly found itexceedingly difficult to speak.
“But excuse me, excuse me. It is for me to explain... how it allhappened... In my turn... though I agree with you... it is unnecessary.But a year ago, the girl died of typhus. I remained lodging there asbefore, and when my landlady moved into her present quarters, she saidto me... and in a friendly way... that she had complete trust in me,but still, would I not give her an I O U for one hundred and fifteenroubles, all the debt I owed her. She said if only I gave her that,she would trust me again, as much as I liked, and that she would never,never--those were her own words--make use of that I O U till I could payof myself... and now, when I have lost my lessons and have nothing toeat, she takes action against me. What am I to say to that?”
“All these affecting details are no business of ours.” Ilya Petrovitchinterrupted rudely. “You must give a written undertaking but as for yourlove affairs and all these tragic events, we have nothing to do withthat.”
“Come now... you are harsh,” muttered Nikodim Fomitch, sitting down atthe table and also beginning to write. He looked a little ashamed.
“Write!” said the head clerk to Raskolnikov.
“Write what?” the latter asked, gruffly.
“I will dictate to you.”
Raskolnikov fancied that the head clerk treated him more casually andcontemptuously after his speech, but strange to say he suddenly feltcompletely indifferent to anyone’s opinion, and this revulsion tookplace in a flash, in one instant. If he had cared to think a little,he would have been amazed indeed that he could have talked to them likethat a minute before, forcing his feelings upon them. And where hadthose feelings come from? Now if the whole room had been filled, notwith police officers, but with those nearest and dearest to him, hewould not have found one human word for them, so empty was his heart. Agloomy sensation of agonising, everlasting solitude and remoteness, tookconscious form in his soul. It was not the meanness of his sentimentaleffusions before Ilya Petrovitch, nor the meanness of the latter’striumph over him that had caused this sudden revulsion in his heart.Oh, what had he to do now with his own baseness, with all these pettyvanities, officers, German women, debts, police-offices? If he had beensentenced to be burnt at that moment, he would not have stirred, wouldhardly have heard the sentence to the end. Something was happening tohim entirely new, sudden and unknown. It was not that he understood, buthe felt clearly with all the intensity of sensation that he couldnever more appeal to these people in the police-office with sentimentaleffusions like his recent outburst, or with anything whatever; and thatif they had been his own brothers and sisters and not police-officers,it would have been utterly out of the question to appeal to them in anycircumstance of life. He had never experienced such a strange and awfulsensation. And what was most agonising--it was more a sensation than aconception or idea, a direct sensation, the most agonising of all thesensations he had known in his life.
The head clerk began dictating to him the usual form of declaration,that he could not pay, that he undertook to do so at a future date, thathe would not leave the town, nor sell his property, and so on.
“But you can’t write, you can hardly hold the pen,” observed the headclerk, looking with curiosity at Raskolnikov. “Are you ill?”
“Yes, I am giddy. Go on!”
“That’s all. Sign it.”
The head clerk took the paper, and turned to attend to others.
Raskolnikov gave back the pen; but instead of getting up and going away,he put his elbows on the table and pressed his head in his hands. Hefelt as if a nail were being driven into his skull. A strange ideasuddenly occurred to him, to get up at once, to go up to NikodimFomitch, and tell him everything that had happened yesterday, and thento go with him to his lodgings and to show him the things in the holein the corner. The impulse was so strong that he got up from his seatto carry it out. “Hadn’t I better think a minute?” flashed through hismind. “No, better cast off the burden without thinking.” But all at oncehe stood still, rooted to the spot. Nikodim Fomitch was talking eagerlywith Ilya Petrovitch, and the words reached him:
“It’s impossible, they’ll both be released. To begin with, the wholestory contradicts itself. Why should they have called the porter, if ithad been their doing? To inform against themselves? Or as a blind? No,that would be too cunning! Besides, Pestryakov, the student, was seen atthe gate by both the porters and a woman as he went in. He was walkingwith three friends, who left him only at the gate, and he asked theporters to direct him, in the presence of the friends. Now, would hehave asked his way if he had been going with such an object? As forKoch, he spent half an hour at the silversmith’s below, before he wentup to the old woman and he left him at exactly a quarter to eight. Nowjust consider...”
“But excuse me, how do you explain this contradiction? They statethemselves that they knocked and the door was locked; yet three minuteslater when they went up with the porter, it turned out the door wasunfastened.”
“That’s just it; the murderer must have been there and bolted himselfin; and they’d have caught him for a certainty if Koch had not beenan ass and gone to look for the porter too. _He_ must have seized theinterval to get downstairs and slip by them somehow. Koch keeps crossinghimself and saying: ‘If I had been there, he would have jumped out andkilled me with his axe.’ He is going to have a thanksgiving service--ha,ha!”
“And no one saw the murderer?”
“They might well not see him; the house is a regular Noah’s Ark,” saidthe head clerk, who was listening.
“It’s clear, quite clear,” Nikodim Fomitch repeated warmly.
“No, it is anything but clear,” Ilya Petrovitch maintained.
Raskolnikov picked up his hat and walked towards the door, but he didnot reach it....
When he recovered consciousness, he found himself sitting in a chair,supported by someone on the right side, while someone else was standingon the left, holding a yellowish glass filled with yellow water, andNikodim Fomitch standing before him, looking intently at him. He got upfrom the chair.
“What’s this? Are you ill?” Nikodim Fomitch asked, rather sharply.
“He could hardly hold his pen when he was signing,” said the head clerk,settling back in his place, and taking up his work again.
“Have you been ill long?” cried Ilya Petrovitch from his place, wherehe, too, was looking through papers. He had, of course, come to look atthe sick man when he fainted, but retired at once when he recovered.
“Since yesterday,” muttered Raskolnikov in reply.
“Did you go out yesterday?”
“Yes.”
“Though you were ill?”
“Yes.”
“At what time?”
“About seven.”
“And where did you go, may I ask?”
“Along the street.”
“Short and clear.”
Raskolnikov, white as a handkerchief, had answered sharply, jerkily,without dropping his black feverish eyes before Ilya Petrovitch’s stare.
“He can scarcely stand upright. And you...” Nikodim Fomitch wasbeginning.
“No matter,” Ilya Petrovitch pronounced rather peculiarly.
Nikodim Fomitch would have made some further protest, but glancing atthe head clerk who was looking very hard at him, he did not speak. Therewas a sudden silence. It was strange.
“Very well, then,” concluded Ilya Petrovitch, “we will not detain you.”
Raskolnikov went out. He caught the sound of eager conversation on hisdeparture, and above the rest rose the questioning voice of NikodimFomitch. In the street, his faintness passed off completely.
“A search--there will be a search at once,” he repeated to himself,hurrying home. “The brutes! they suspect.”
His former terror mastered him completely again.
CHAPTER II
“And what if there has been a search already? What if I find them in myroom?”
But here was his room. Nothing and no one in it. No one had peeped in.Even Nastasya had not touched it. But heavens! how could he have leftall those things in the hole?
He rushed to the corner, slipped his hand under the paper, pulled thethings out and lined his pockets with them. There were eight articles inall: two little boxes with ear-rings or something of the sort, he hardlylooked to see; then four small leather cases. There was a chain, too,merely wrapped in newspaper and something else in newspaper, that lookedlike a decoration.... He put them all in the different pockets of hisovercoat, and the remaining pocket of his trousers, trying to concealthem as much as possible. He took the purse, too. Then he went out ofhis room, leaving the door open. He walked quickly and resolutely, andthough he felt shattered, he had his senses about him. He was afraid ofpursuit, he was afraid that in another half-hour, another quarter of anhour perhaps, instructions would be issued for his pursuit, and so atall costs, he must hide all traces before then. He must clear everythingup while he still had some strength, some reasoning power left him....Where was he to go?
That had long been settled: “Fling them into the canal, and all traceshidden in the water, the thing would be at an end.” So he had decided inthe night of his delirium when several times he had had the impulse toget up and go away, to make haste, and get rid of it all. But to getrid of it, turned out to be a very difficult task. He wandered alongthe bank of the Ekaterininsky Canal for half an hour or more and lookedseveral times at the steps running down to the water, but he could notthink of carrying out his plan; either rafts stood at the steps’ edge,and women were washing clothes on them, or boats were moored there, andpeople were swarming everywhere. Moreover he could be seen and noticedfrom the banks on all sides; it would look suspicious for a man to godown on purpose, stop, and throw something into the water. And what ifthe boxes were to float instead of sinking? And of course they would.Even as it was, everyone he met seemed to stare and look round, as ifthey had nothing to do but to watch him. “Why is it, or can it be myfancy?” he thought.
At last the thought struck him that it might be better to go to theNeva. There were not so many people there, he would be less observed,and it would be more convenient in every way, above all it was furtheroff. He wondered how he could have been wandering for a good half-hour,worried and anxious in this dangerous past without thinking of itbefore. And that half-hour he had lost over an irrational plan, simplybecause he had thought of it in delirium! He had become extremely absentand forgetful and he was aware of it. He certainly must make haste.
He walked towards the Neva along V---- Prospect, but on the wayanother idea struck him. “Why to the Neva? Would it not be better to gosomewhere far off, to the Islands again, and there hide the thingsin some solitary place, in a wood or under a bush, and mark the spotperhaps?” And though he felt incapable of clear judgment, the ideaseemed to him a sound one. But he was not destined to go there. Forcoming out of V---- Prospect towards the square, he saw on the left apassage leading between two blank walls to a courtyard. On the righthand, the blank unwhitewashed wall of a four-storied house stretched farinto the court; on the left, a wooden hoarding ran parallel with it fortwenty paces into the court, and then turned sharply to the left. Herewas a deserted fenced-off place where rubbish of different sorts waslying. At the end of the court, the corner of a low, smutty, stone shed,apparently part of some workshop, peeped from behind the hoarding. Itwas probably a carriage builder’s or carpenter’s shed; the whole placefrom the entrance was black with coal dust. Here would be the place tothrow it, he thought. Not seeing anyone in the yard, he slipped in, andat once saw near the gate a sink, such as is often put in yards wherethere are many workmen or cab-drivers; and on the hoarding above hadbeen scribbled in chalk the time-honoured witticism, “Standing herestrictly forbidden.” This was all the better, for there would be nothingsuspicious about his going in. “Here I could throw it all in a heap andget away!”
Looking round once more, with his hand already in his pocket, he noticedagainst the outer wall, between the entrance and the sink, a big unhewnstone, weighing perhaps sixty pounds. The other side of the wall was astreet. He could hear passers-by, always numerous in that part, but hecould not be seen from the entrance, unless someone came in from thestreet, which might well happen indeed, so there was need of haste.
He bent down over the stone, seized the top of it firmly in both hands,and using all his strength turned it over. Under the stone was a smallhollow in the ground, and he immediately emptied his pocket into it.The purse lay at the top, and yet the hollow was not filled up. Then heseized the stone again and with one twist turned it back, so that it wasin the same position again, though it stood a very little higher. Buthe scraped the earth about it and pressed it at the edges with his foot.Nothing could be noticed.
Then he went out, and turned into the square. Again an intense,almost unbearable joy overwhelmed him for an instant, as it had inthe police-office. “I have buried my tracks! And who, who can think oflooking under that stone? It has been lying there most likely ever sincethe house was built, and will lie as many years more. And if it werefound, who would think of me? It is all over! No clue!” And he laughed.Yes, he remembered that he began laughing a thin, nervous noiselesslaugh, and went on laughing all the time he was crossing the square. Butwhen he reached the K---- Boulevard where two days before he had comeupon that girl, his laughter suddenly ceased. Other ideas crept into hismind. He felt all at once that it would be loathsome to pass that seaton which after the girl was gone, he had sat and pondered, and that itwould be hateful, too, to meet that whiskered policeman to whom he hadgiven the twenty copecks: “Damn him!”
He walked, looking about him angrily and distractedly. All his ideas nowseemed to be circling round some single point, and he felt that therereally was such a point, and that now, now, he was left facing thatpoint--and for the first time, indeed, during the last two months.
“Damn it all!” he thought suddenly, in a fit of ungovernable fury.“If it has begun, then it has begun. Hang the new life! Good Lord, howstupid it is!... And what lies I told to-day! How despicably I fawnedupon that wretched Ilya Petrovitch! But that is all folly! What do Icare for them all, and my fawning upon them! It is not that at all! Itis not that at all!”
Suddenly he stopped; a new utterly unexpected and exceedingly simplequestion perplexed and bitterly confounded him.
“If it all has really been done deliberately and not idiotically, ifI really had a certain and definite object, how is it I did not evenglance into the purse and don’t know what I had there, for which I haveundergone these agonies, and have deliberately undertaken this base,filthy degrading business? And here I wanted at once to throw into thewater the purse together with all the things which I had not seeneither... how’s that?”
Yes, that was so, that was all so. Yet he had known it all before, andit was not a new question for him, even when it was decided in the nightwithout hesitation and consideration, as though so it must be, as thoughit could not possibly be otherwise.... Yes, he had known it all, andunderstood it all; it surely had all been settled even yesterday at themoment when he was bending over the box and pulling the jewel-cases outof it.... Yes, so it was.
“It is because I am very ill,” he decided grimly at last, “I have beenworrying and fretting myself, and I don’t know what I am doing....Yesterday and the day before yesterday and all this time I have beenworrying myself.... I shall get well and I shall not worry.... But whatif I don’t get well at all? Good God, how sick I am of it all!”
He walked on without resting. He had a terrible longing for somedistraction, but he did not know what to do, what to attempt. A newoverwhelming sensation was gaining more and more mastery over himevery moment; this was an immeasurable, almost physical, repulsion foreverything surrounding him, an obstinate, malignant feeling of hatred.All who met him were loathsome to him--he loathed their faces, theirmovements, their gestures. If anyone had addressed him, he felt that hemight have spat at him or bitten him....
He stopped suddenly, on coming out on the bank of the Little Neva, nearthe bridge to Vassilyevsky Ostrov. “Why, he lives here, in that house,”he thought, “why, I have not come to Razumihin of my own accord! Hereit’s the same thing over again.... Very interesting to know, though;have I come on purpose or have I simply walked here by chance? Nevermind, I said the day before yesterday that I would go and see him theday _after_; well, and so I will! Besides I really cannot go furthernow.”
He went up to Razumihin’s room on the fifth floor.
The latter was at home in his garret, busily writing at the moment, andhe opened the door himself. It was four months since they had seen eachother. Razumihin was sitting in a ragged dressing-gown, with slippers onhis bare feet, unkempt, unshaven and unwashed. His face showed surprise.
“Is it you?” he cried. He looked his comrade up and down; then after abrief pause, he whistled. “As hard up as all that! Why, brother, you’vecut me out!” he added, looking at Raskolnikov’s rags. “Come sit down,you are tired, I’ll be bound.”
And when he had sunk down on the American leather sofa, which wasin even worse condition than his own, Razumihin saw at once that hisvisitor was ill.
“Why, you are seriously ill, do you know that?” He began feeling hispulse. Raskolnikov pulled away his hand.
“Never mind,” he said, “I have come for this: I have no lessons.... Iwanted,... but I don’t really want lessons....”
“But I say! You are delirious, you know!” Razumihin observed, watchinghim carefully.
“No, I am not.”
Raskolnikov got up from the sofa. As he had mounted the stairs toRazumihin’s, he had not realised that he would be meeting his friendface to face. Now, in a flash, he knew, that what he was least of alldisposed for at that moment was to be face to face with anyone in thewide world. His spleen rose within him. He almost choked with rage athimself as soon as he crossed Razumihin’s threshold.
“Good-bye,” he said abruptly, and walked to the door.
“Stop, stop! You queer fish.”
“I don’t want to,” said the other, again pulling away his hand.
“Then why the devil have you come? Are you mad, or what? Why, thisis... almost insulting! I won’t let you go like that.”
“Well, then, I came to you because I know no one but you who couldhelp... to begin... because you are kinder than anyone--cleverer, Imean, and can judge... and now I see that I want nothing. Do you hear?Nothing at all... no one’s services... no one’s sympathy. I am bymyself... alone. Come, that’s enough. Leave me alone.”
“Stay a minute, you sweep! You are a perfect madman. As you like for allI care. I have no lessons, do you see, and I don’t care about that, butthere’s a bookseller, Heruvimov--and he takes the place of a lesson.I would not exchange him for five lessons. He’s doing publishing of akind, and issuing natural science manuals and what a circulation theyhave! The very titles are worth the money! You always maintained that Iwas a fool, but by Jove, my boy, there are greater fools than I am!Now he is setting up for being advanced, not that he has an inkling ofanything, but, of course, I encourage him. Here are two signatures ofthe German text--in my opinion, the crudest charlatanism; it discussesthe question, ‘Is woman a human being?’ And, of course, triumphantlyproves that she is. Heruvimov is going to bring out this work as acontribution to the woman question; I am translating it; he will expandthese two and a half signatures into six, we shall make up a gorgeoustitle half a page long and bring it out at half a rouble. It will do! Hepays me six roubles the signature, it works out to about fifteen roublesfor the job, and I’ve had six already in advance. When we have finishedthis, we are going to begin a translation about whales, and then some ofthe dullest scandals out of the second part of _Les Confessions_ we havemarked for translation; somebody has told Heruvimov, that Rousseau wasa kind of Radishchev. You may be sure I don’t contradict him, hang him!Well, would you like to do the second signature of ‘_Is woman a humanbeing?_’ If you would, take the German and pens and paper--all thoseare provided, and take three roubles; for as I have had six roubles inadvance on the whole thing, three roubles come to you for your share.And when you have finished the signature there will be another threeroubles for you. And please don’t think I am doing you a service; quitethe contrary, as soon as you came in, I saw how you could help me; tobegin with, I am weak in spelling, and secondly, I am sometimes utterlyadrift in German, so that I make it up as I go along for the most part.The only comfort is, that it’s bound to be a change for the better.Though who can tell, maybe it’s sometimes for the worse. Will you takeit?”
Raskolnikov took the German sheets in silence, took the three roublesand without a word went out. Razumihin gazed after him in astonishment.But when Raskolnikov was in the next street, he turned back, mounted thestairs to Razumihin’s again and laying on the table the German articleand the three roubles, went out again, still without uttering a word.
“Are you raving, or what?” Razumihin shouted, roused to fury at last.“What farce is this? You’ll drive me crazy too... what did you come tosee me for, damn you?”
“I don’t want... translation,” muttered Raskolnikov from the stairs.
“Then what the devil do you want?” shouted Razumihin from above.Raskolnikov continued descending the staircase in silence.
“Hey, there! Where are you living?”
No answer.
“Well, confound you then!”
But Raskolnikov was already stepping into the street. On the NikolaevskyBridge he was roused to full consciousness again by an unpleasantincident. A coachman, after shouting at him two or three times, gave hima violent lash on the back with his whip, for having almost fallen underhis horses’ hoofs. The lash so infuriated him that he dashed away to therailing (for some unknown reason he had been walking in the very middleof the bridge in the traffic). He angrily clenched and ground his teeth.He heard laughter, of course.
“Serves him right!”
“A pickpocket I dare say.”
“Pretending to be drunk, for sure, and getting under the wheels onpurpose; and you have to answer for him.”
“It’s a regular profession, that’s what it is.”
But while he stood at the railing, still looking angry and bewilderedafter the retreating carriage, and rubbing his back, he suddenly feltsomeone thrust money into his hand. He looked. It was an elderly womanin a kerchief and goatskin shoes, with a girl, probably her daughter,wearing a hat, and carrying a green parasol.
“Take it, my good man, in Christ’s name.”
He took it and they passed on. It was a piece of twenty copecks. Fromhis dress and appearance they might well have taken him for a beggarasking alms in the streets, and the gift of the twenty copecks hedoubtless owed to the blow, which made them feel sorry for him.
He closed his hand on the twenty copecks, walked on for ten paces, andturned facing the Neva, looking towards the palace. The sky was withouta cloud and the water was almost bright blue, which is so rare in theNeva. The cupola of the cathedral, which is seen at its best from thebridge about twenty paces from the chapel, glittered in the sunlight,and in the pure air every ornament on it could be clearly distinguished.The pain from the lash went off, and Raskolnikov forgot about it; oneuneasy and not quite definite idea occupied him now completely. He stoodstill, and gazed long and intently into the distance; this spot wasespecially familiar to him. When he was attending the university, he hadhundreds of times--generally on his way home--stood still on this spot,gazed at this truly magnificent spectacle and almost always marvelled ata vague and mysterious emotion it roused in him. It left him strangelycold; this gorgeous picture was for him blank and lifeless. He wonderedevery time at his sombre and enigmatic impression and, mistrustinghimself, put off finding the explanation of it. He vividly recalledthose old doubts and perplexities, and it seemed to him that it wasno mere chance that he recalled them now. It struck him as strange andgrotesque, that he should have stopped at the same spot as before,as though he actually imagined he could think the same thoughts, beinterested in the same theories and pictures that had interested him...so short a time ago. He felt it almost amusing, and yet it wrung hisheart. Deep down, hidden far away out of sight all that seemed to himnow--all his old past, his old thoughts, his old problems and theories,his old impressions and that picture and himself and all, all.... Hefelt as though he were flying upwards, and everything were vanishingfrom his sight. Making an unconscious movement with his hand, hesuddenly became aware of the piece of money in his fist. He opened hishand, stared at the coin, and with a sweep of his arm flung it intothe water; then he turned and went home. It seemed to him, he had cuthimself off from everyone and from everything at that moment.
Evening was coming on when he reached home, so that he must have beenwalking about six hours. How and where he came back he did not remember.Undressing, and quivering like an overdriven horse, he lay down on thesofa, drew his greatcoat over him, and at once sank into oblivion....
It was dusk when he was waked up by a fearful scream. Good God, what ascream! Such unnatural sounds, such howling, wailing, grinding, tears,blows and curses he had never heard.
He could never have imagined such brutality, such frenzy. In terror hesat up in bed, almost swooning with agony. But the fighting, wailingand cursing grew louder and louder. And then to his intense amazementhe caught the voice of his landlady. She was howling, shrieking andwailing, rapidly, hurriedly, incoherently, so that he could not makeout what she was talking about; she was beseeching, no doubt, not to bebeaten, for she was being mercilessly beaten on the stairs. The voice ofher assailant was so horrible from spite and rage that it was almosta croak; but he, too, was saying something, and just as quicklyand indistinctly, hurrying and spluttering. All at once Raskolnikovtrembled; he recognised the voice--it was the voice of Ilya Petrovitch.Ilya Petrovitch here and beating the landlady! He is kicking her,banging her head against the steps--that’s clear, that can be toldfrom the sounds, from the cries and the thuds. How is it, is the worldtopsy-turvy? He could hear people running in crowds from all the storeysand all the staircases; he heard voices, exclamations, knocking, doorsbanging. “But why, why, and how could it be?” he repeated, thinkingseriously that he had gone mad. But no, he heard too distinctly! Andthey would come to him then next, “for no doubt... it’s all aboutthat... about yesterday.... Good God!” He would have fastened his doorwith the latch, but he could not lift his hand... besides, it wouldbe useless. Terror gripped his heart like ice, tortured him and numbedhim.... But at last all this uproar, after continuing about ten minutes,began gradually to subside. The landlady was moaning and groaning; IlyaPetrovitch was still uttering threats and curses.... But at last he,too, seemed to be silent, and now he could not be heard. “Can he havegone away? Good Lord!” Yes, and now the landlady is going too, stillweeping and moaning... and then her door slammed.... Now the crowd wasgoing from the stairs to their rooms, exclaiming, disputing, callingto one another, raising their voices to a shout, dropping them to awhisper. There must have been numbers of them--almost all the inmatesof the block. “But, good God, how could it be! And why, why had he comehere!”
Raskolnikov sank worn out on the sofa, but could not close his eyes. Helay for half an hour in such anguish, such an intolerable sensation ofinfinite terror as he had never experienced before. Suddenly a brightlight flashed into his room. Nastasya came in with a candle and a plateof soup. Looking at him carefully and ascertaining that he was notasleep, she set the candle on the table and began to lay out what shehad brought--bread, salt, a plate, a spoon.
“You’ve eaten nothing since yesterday, I warrant. You’ve been trudgingabout all day, and you’re shaking with fever.”
“Nastasya... what were they beating the landlady for?”
She looked intently at him.
“Who beat the landlady?”
“Just now... half an hour ago, Ilya Petrovitch, the assistantsuperintendent, on the stairs.... Why was he ill-treating her like that,and... why was he here?”
Nastasya scrutinised him, silent and frowning, and her scrutiny lasted along time. He felt uneasy, even frightened at her searching eyes.
“Nastasya, why don’t you speak?” he said timidly at last in a weakvoice.
“It’s the blood,” she answered at last softly, as though speaking toherself.
“Blood? What blood?” he muttered, growing white and turning towards thewall.
Nastasya still looked at him without speaking.
“Nobody has been beating the landlady,” she declared at last in a firm,resolute voice.
He gazed at her, hardly able to breathe.
“I heard it myself.... I was not asleep... I was sitting up,” hesaid still more timidly. “I listened a long while. The assistantsuperintendent came.... Everyone ran out on to the stairs from all theflats.”
“No one has been here. That’s the blood crying in your ears. Whenthere’s no outlet for it and it gets clotted, you begin fancyingthings.... Will you eat something?”
He made no answer. Nastasya still stood over him, watching him.
“Give me something to drink... Nastasya.”
She went downstairs and returned with a white earthenware jug of water.He remembered only swallowing one sip of the cold water and spillingsome on his neck. Then followed forgetfulness.
CHAPTER III
He was not completely unconscious, however, all the time he was ill; hewas in a feverish state, sometimes delirious, sometimes half conscious.He remembered a great deal afterwards. Sometimes it seemed as thoughthere were a number of people round him; they wanted to take him awaysomewhere, there was a great deal of squabbling and discussing abouthim. Then he would be alone in the room; they had all gone away afraidof him, and only now and then opened the door a crack to look at him;they threatened him, plotted something together, laughed, and mockedat him. He remembered Nastasya often at his bedside; he distinguishedanother person, too, whom he seemed to know very well, though he couldnot remember who he was, and this fretted him, even made him cry.Sometimes he fancied he had been lying there a month; at other timesit all seemed part of the same day. But of _that_--of _that_ he hadno recollection, and yet every minute he felt that he had forgottensomething he ought to remember. He worried and tormented himself tryingto remember, moaned, flew into a rage, or sank into awful, intolerableterror. Then he struggled to get up, would have run away, but someonealways prevented him by force, and he sank back into impotence andforgetfulness. At last he returned to complete consciousness.
It happened at ten o’clock in the morning. On fine days the sun shoneinto the room at that hour, throwing a streak of light on the rightwall and the corner near the door. Nastasya was standing beside himwith another person, a complete stranger, who was looking at himvery inquisitively. He was a young man with a beard, wearing a full,short-waisted coat, and looked like a messenger. The landlady waspeeping in at the half-opened door. Raskolnikov sat up.
“Who is this, Nastasya?” he asked, pointing to the young man.
“I say, he’s himself again!” she said.
“He is himself,” echoed the man.
Concluding that he had returned to his senses, the landlady closed thedoor and disappeared. She was always shy and dreaded conversations ordiscussions. She was a woman of forty, not at all bad-looking, fatand buxom, with black eyes and eyebrows, good-natured from fatness andlaziness, and absurdly bashful.
“Who... are you?” he went on, addressing the man. But at that momentthe door was flung open, and, stooping a little, as he was so tall,Razumihin came in.
“What a cabin it is!” he cried. “I am always knocking my head. You callthis a lodging! So you are conscious, brother? I’ve just heard the newsfrom Pashenka.”
“He has just come to,” said Nastasya.
“Just come to,” echoed the man again, with a smile.
“And who are you?” Razumihin asked, suddenly addressing him. “My name isVrazumihin, at your service; not Razumihin, as I am always called, butVrazumihin, a student and gentleman; and he is my friend. And who areyou?”
“I am the messenger from our office, from the merchant Shelopaev, andI’ve come on business.”
“Please sit down.” Razumihin seated himself on the other side of thetable. “It’s a good thing you’ve come to, brother,” he went on toRaskolnikov. “For the last four days you have scarcely eaten or drunkanything. We had to give you tea in spoonfuls. I brought Zossimov to seeyou twice. You remember Zossimov? He examined you carefully and said atonce it was nothing serious--something seemed to have gone to your head.Some nervous nonsense, the result of bad feeding, he says you have nothad enough beer and radish, but it’s nothing much, it will pass and youwill be all right. Zossimov is a first-rate fellow! He is making quite aname. Come, I won’t keep you,” he said, addressing the man again. “Willyou explain what you want? You must know, Rodya, this is the second timethey have sent from the office; but it was another man last time, and Italked to him. Who was it came before?”
“That was the day before yesterday, I venture to say, if you please,sir. That was Alexey Semyonovitch; he is in our office, too.”
“He was more intelligent than you, don’t you think so?”
“Yes, indeed, sir, he is of more weight than I am.”
“Quite so; go on.”
“At your mamma’s request, through Afanasy Ivanovitch Vahrushin, of whomI presume you have heard more than once, a remittance is sent to youfrom our office,” the man began, addressing Raskolnikov. “If you are inan intelligible condition, I’ve thirty-five roubles to remit to you, asSemyon Semyonovitch has received from Afanasy Ivanovitch at your mamma’srequest instructions to that effect, as on previous occasions. Do youknow him, sir?”
“Yes, I remember... Vahrushin,” Raskolnikov said dreamily.
“You hear, he knows Vahrushin,” cried Razumihin. “He is in ‘anintelligible condition’! And I see you are an intelligent man too. Well,it’s always pleasant to hear words of wisdom.”
“That’s the gentleman, Vahrushin, Afanasy Ivanovitch. And at the requestof your mamma, who has sent you a remittance once before in thesame manner through him, he did not refuse this time also, and sentinstructions to Semyon Semyonovitch some days since to hand youthirty-five roubles in the hope of better to come.”
“That ‘hoping for better to come’ is the best thing you’ve said, though‘your mamma’ is not bad either. Come then, what do you say? Is he fullyconscious, eh?”
“That’s all right. If only he can sign this little paper.”
“He can scrawl his name. Have you got the book?”
“Yes, here’s the book.”
“Give it to me. Here, Rodya, sit up. I’ll hold you. Take the pen andscribble ‘Raskolnikov’ for him. For just now, brother, money is sweeterto us than treacle.”
“I don’t want it,” said Raskolnikov, pushing away the pen.
“Not want it?”
“I won’t sign it.”
“How the devil can you do without signing it?”
“I don’t want... the money.”
“Don’t want the money! Come, brother, that’s nonsense, I bear witness.Don’t trouble, please, it’s only that he is on his travels again. Butthat’s pretty common with him at all times though.... You are a man ofjudgment and we will take him in hand, that is, more simply, take hishand and he will sign it. Here.”
“But I can come another time.”
“No, no. Why should we trouble you? You are a man of judgment.... Now,Rodya, don’t keep your visitor, you see he is waiting,” and he madeready to hold Raskolnikov’s hand in earnest.
“Stop, I’ll do it alone,” said the latter, taking the pen and signinghis name.
The messenger took out the money and went away.
“Bravo! And now, brother, are you hungry?”
“Yes,” answered Raskolnikov.
“Is there any soup?”
“Some of yesterday’s,” answered Nastasya, who was still standing there.
“With potatoes and rice in it?”
“Yes.”
“I know it by heart. Bring soup and give us some tea.”
“Very well.”
Raskolnikov looked at all this with profound astonishment and a dull,unreasoning terror. He made up his mind to keep quiet and see whatwould happen. “I believe I am not wandering. I believe it’s reality,” hethought.
In a couple of minutes Nastasya returned with the soup, and announcedthat the tea would be ready directly. With the soup she brought twospoons, two plates, salt, pepper, mustard for the beef, and so on. Thetable was set as it had not been for a long time. The cloth was clean.
“It would not be amiss, Nastasya, if Praskovya Pavlovna were to send usup a couple of bottles of beer. We could empty them.”
“Well, you are a cool hand,” muttered Nastasya, and she departed tocarry out his orders.
Raskolnikov still gazed wildly with strained attention. MeanwhileRazumihin sat down on the sofa beside him, as clumsily as a bear put hisleft arm round Raskolnikov’s head, although he was able to sit up, andwith his right hand gave him a spoonful of soup, blowing on it thatit might not burn him. But the soup was only just warm. Raskolnikovswallowed one spoonful greedily, then a second, then a third. But aftergiving him a few more spoonfuls of soup, Razumihin suddenly stopped, andsaid that he must ask Zossimov whether he ought to have more.
Nastasya came in with two bottles of beer.
“And will you have tea?”
“Yes.”
“Cut along, Nastasya, and bring some tea, for tea we may venture onwithout the faculty. But here is the beer!” He moved back to his chair,pulled the soup and meat in front of him, and began eating as though hehad not touched food for three days.
“I must tell you, Rodya, I dine like this here every day now,” hemumbled with his mouth full of beef, “and it’s all Pashenka, your dearlittle landlady, who sees to that; she loves to do anything for me. Idon’t ask for it, but, of course, I don’t object. And here’s Nastasyawith the tea. She is a quick girl. Nastasya, my dear, won’t you havesome beer?”
“Get along with your nonsense!”
“A cup of tea, then?”
“A cup of tea, maybe.”
“Pour it out. Stay, I’ll pour it out myself. Sit down.”
He poured out two cups, left his dinner, and sat on the sofa again. Asbefore, he put his left arm round the sick man’s head, raised him upand gave him tea in spoonfuls, again blowing each spoonful steadily andearnestly, as though this process was the principal and most effectivemeans towards his friend’s recovery. Raskolnikov said nothing and madeno resistance, though he felt quite strong enough to sit up on the sofawithout support and could not merely have held a cup or a spoon, buteven perhaps could have walked about. But from some queer, almostanimal, cunning he conceived the idea of hiding his strength and lyinglow for a time, pretending if necessary not to be yet in full possessionof his faculties, and meanwhile listening to find out what was going on.Yet he could not overcome his sense of repugnance. After sipping a dozenspoonfuls of tea, he suddenly released his head, pushed the spoon awaycapriciously, and sank back on the pillow. There were actually realpillows under his head now, down pillows in clean cases, he observedthat, too, and took note of it.
“Pashenka must give us some raspberry jam to-day to make him someraspberry tea,” said Razumihin, going back to his chair and attackinghis soup and beer again.
“And where is she to get raspberries for you?” asked Nastasya, balancinga saucer on her five outspread fingers and sipping tea through a lump ofsugar.
“She’ll get it at the shop, my dear. You see, Rodya, all sorts of thingshave been happening while you have been laid up. When you decamped inthat rascally way without leaving your address, I felt so angry that Iresolved to find you out and punish you. I set to work that very day.How I ran about making inquiries for you! This lodging of yours I hadforgotten, though I never remembered it, indeed, because I did not knowit; and as for your old lodgings, I could only remember it was at theFive Corners, Harlamov’s house. I kept trying to find that Harlamov’shouse, and afterwards it turned out that it was not Harlamov’s, butBuch’s. How one muddles up sound sometimes! So I lost my temper, and Iwent on the chance to the address bureau next day, and only fancy, intwo minutes they looked you up! Your name is down there.”
“My name!”
“I should think so; and yet a General Kobelev they could not find whileI was there. Well, it’s a long story. But as soon as I did land on thisplace, I soon got to know all your affairs--all, all, brother, I knoweverything; Nastasya here will tell you. I made the acquaintance ofNikodim Fomitch and Ilya Petrovitch, and the house-porter and Mr.Zametov, Alexandr Grigorievitch, the head clerk in the police office,and, last, but not least, of Pashenka; Nastasya here knows....”
“He’s got round her,” Nastasya murmured, smiling slyly.
“Why don’t you put the sugar in your tea, Nastasya Nikiforovna?”
“You are a one!” Nastasya cried suddenly, going off into a giggle. “I amnot Nikiforovna, but Petrovna,” she added suddenly, recovering from hermirth.
“I’ll make a note of it. Well, brother, to make a long story short,I was going in for a regular explosion here to uproot all malignantinfluences in the locality, but Pashenka won the day. I had notexpected, brother, to find her so... prepossessing. Eh, what do youthink?”
Raskolnikov did not speak, but he still kept his eyes fixed upon him,full of alarm.
“And all that could be wished, indeed, in every respect,” Razumihin wenton, not at all embarrassed by his silence.
“Ah, the sly dog!” Nastasya shrieked again. This conversation affordedher unspeakable delight.
“It’s a pity, brother, that you did not set to work in the right wayat first. You ought to have approached her differently. She is, soto speak, a most unaccountable character. But we will talk about hercharacter later.... How could you let things come to such a pass thatshe gave up sending you your dinner? And that I O U? You must have beenmad to sign an I O U. And that promise of marriage when her daughter,Natalya Yegorovna, was alive?... I know all about it! But I see that’sa delicate matter and I am an ass; forgive me. But, talking offoolishness, do you know Praskovya Pavlovna is not nearly so foolish asyou would think at first sight?”
“No,” mumbled Raskolnikov, looking away, but feeling that it was betterto keep up the conversation.
“She isn’t, is she?” cried Razumihin, delighted to get an answer outof him. “But she is not very clever either, eh? She is essentially,essentially an unaccountable character! I am sometimes quite at a loss,I assure you.... She must be forty; she says she is thirty-six, andof course she has every right to say so. But I swear I judge herintellectually, simply from the metaphysical point of view; there is asort of symbolism sprung up between us, a sort of algebra or what not!I don’t understand it! Well, that’s all nonsense. Only, seeing that youare not a student now and have lost your lessons and your clothes, andthat through the young lady’s death she has no need to treat you asa relation, she suddenly took fright; and as you hid in your den anddropped all your old relations with her, she planned to get rid of you.And she’s been cherishing that design a long time, but was sorry to losethe I O U, for you assured her yourself that your mother would pay.”
“It was base of me to say that.... My mother herself is almosta beggar... and I told a lie to keep my lodging... and be fed,”Raskolnikov said loudly and distinctly.
“Yes, you did very sensibly. But the worst of it is that at that pointMr. Tchebarov turns up, a business man. Pashenka would never havethought of doing anything on her own account, she is too retiring; butthe business man is by no means retiring, and first thing he puts thequestion, ‘Is there any hope of realising the I O U?’ Answer: there is,because he has a mother who would save her Rodya with her hundred andtwenty-five roubles pension, if she has to starve herself; and a sister,too, who would go into bondage for his sake. That’s what he was buildingupon.... Why do you start? I know all the ins and outs of your affairsnow, my dear boy--it’s not for nothing that you were so open withPashenka when you were her prospective son-in-law, and I say all this asa friend.... But I tell you what it is; an honest and sensitive man isopen; and a business man ‘listens and goes on eating’ you up. Well,then she gave the I O U by way of payment to this Tchebarov, and withouthesitation he made a formal demand for payment. When I heard of all thisI wanted to blow him up, too, to clear my conscience, but by that timeharmony reigned between me and Pashenka, and I insisted on stoppingthe whole affair, engaging that you would pay. I went security for you,brother. Do you understand? We called Tchebarov, flung him tenroubles and got the I O U back from him, and here I have the honour ofpresenting it to you. She trusts your word now. Here, take it, you see Ihave torn it.”
Razumihin put the note on the table. Raskolnikov looked at him andturned to the wall without uttering a word. Even Razumihin felt atwinge.
“I see, brother,” he said a moment later, “that I have been playing thefool again. I thought I should amuse you with my chatter, and I believeI have only made you cross.”
“Was it you I did not recognise when I was delirious?” Raskolnikovasked, after a moment’s pause without turning his head.
“Yes, and you flew into a rage about it, especially when I broughtZametov one day.”
“Zametov? The head clerk? What for?” Raskolnikov turned round quicklyand fixed his eyes on Razumihin.
“What’s the matter with you?... What are you upset about? He wanted tomake your acquaintance because I talked to him a lot about you.... Howcould I have found out so much except from him? He is a capitalfellow, brother, first-rate... in his own way, of course. Now we arefriends--see each other almost every day. I have moved into this part,you know. I have only just moved. I’ve been with him to Luise Ivanovnaonce or twice.... Do you remember Luise, Luise Ivanovna?
“Did I say anything in delirium?”
“I should think so! You were beside yourself.”
“What did I rave about?”
“What next? What did you rave about? What people do rave about.... Well,brother, now I must not lose time. To work.” He got up from the tableand took up his cap.
“What did I rave about?”
“How he keeps on! Are you afraid of having let out some secret? Don’tworry yourself; you said nothing about a countess. But you said a lotabout a bulldog, and about ear-rings and chains, and about KrestovskyIsland, and some porter, and Nikodim Fomitch and Ilya Petrovitch, theassistant superintendent. And another thing that was of special interestto you was your own sock. You whined, ‘Give me my sock.’ Zametovhunted all about your room for your socks, and with his own scented,ring-bedecked fingers he gave you the rag. And only then were youcomforted, and for the next twenty-four hours you held the wretchedthing in your hand; we could not get it from you. It is most likelysomewhere under your quilt at this moment. And then you asked sopiteously for fringe for your trousers. We tried to find out what sortof fringe, but we could not make it out. Now to business! Here arethirty-five roubles; I take ten of them, and shall give you an accountof them in an hour or two. I will let Zossimov know at the same time,though he ought to have been here long ago, for it is nearly twelve. Andyou, Nastasya, look in pretty often while I am away, to see whether hewants a drink or anything else. And I will tell Pashenka what is wantedmyself. Good-bye!”
“He calls her Pashenka! Ah, he’s a deep one!” said Nastasya as he wentout; then she opened the door and stood listening, but could not resistrunning downstairs after him. She was very eager to hear what he wouldsay to the landlady. She was evidently quite fascinated by Razumihin.
No sooner had she left the room than the sick man flung off thebedclothes and leapt out of bed like a madman. With burning, twitchingimpatience he had waited for them to be gone so that he might set towork. But to what work? Now, as though to spite him, it eluded him.
“Good God, only tell me one thing: do they know of it yet or not? Whatif they know it and are only pretending, mocking me while I am laid up,and then they will come in and tell me that it’s been discovered longago and that they have only... What am I to do now? That’s what I’veforgotten, as though on purpose; forgotten it all at once, I remembereda minute ago.”
He stood in the middle of the room and gazed in miserable bewildermentabout him; he walked to the door, opened it, listened; but that was notwhat he wanted. Suddenly, as though recalling something, he rushed tothe corner where there was a hole under the paper, began examining it,put his hand into the hole, fumbled--but that was not it. He went to thestove, opened it and began rummaging in the ashes; the frayed edges ofhis trousers and the rags cut off his pocket were lying there just ashe had thrown them. No one had looked, then! Then he remembered the sockabout which Razumihin had just been telling him. Yes, there it lay onthe sofa under the quilt, but it was so covered with dust and grime thatZametov could not have seen anything on it.
“Bah, Zametov! The police office! And why am I sent for to the policeoffice? Where’s the notice? Bah! I am mixing it up; that was then. Ilooked at my sock then, too, but now... now I have been ill. Butwhat did Zametov come for? Why did Razumihin bring him?” he muttered,helplessly sitting on the sofa again. “What does it mean? Am I still indelirium, or is it real? I believe it is real.... Ah, I remember; I mustescape! Make haste to escape. Yes, I must, I must escape! Yes... butwhere? And where are my clothes? I’ve no boots. They’ve taken them away!They’ve hidden them! I understand! Ah, here is my coat--they passed thatover! And here is money on the table, thank God! And here’s the I O U...I’ll take the money and go and take another lodging. They won’t findme!... Yes, but the address bureau? They’ll find me, Razumihin will findme. Better escape altogether... far away... to America, and let themdo their worst! And take the I O U... it would be of use there.... Whatelse shall I take? They think I am ill! They don’t know that I can walk,ha-ha-ha! I could see by their eyes that they know all about it! Ifonly I could get downstairs! And what if they have set a watchthere--policemen! What’s this tea? Ah, and here is beer left, half abottle, cold!”
He snatched up the bottle, which still contained a glassful of beer, andgulped it down with relish, as though quenching a flame in his breast.But in another minute the beer had gone to his head, and a faint andeven pleasant shiver ran down his spine. He lay down and pulled thequilt over him. His sick and incoherent thoughts grew more and moredisconnected, and soon a light, pleasant drowsiness came upon him. Witha sense of comfort he nestled his head into the pillow, wrapped moreclosely about him the soft, wadded quilt which had replaced the old,ragged greatcoat, sighed softly and sank into a deep, sound, refreshingsleep.
He woke up, hearing someone come in. He opened his eyes and sawRazumihin standing in the doorway, uncertain whether to come in ornot. Raskolnikov sat up quickly on the sofa and gazed at him, as thoughtrying to recall something.
“Ah, you are not asleep! Here I am! Nastasya, bring in the parcel!”Razumihin shouted down the stairs. “You shall have the accountdirectly.”
“What time is it?” asked Raskolnikov, looking round uneasily.
“Yes, you had a fine sleep, brother, it’s almost evening, it will be sixo’clock directly. You have slept more than six hours.”
“Good heavens! Have I?”
“And why not? It will do you good. What’s the hurry? A tryst, is it?We’ve all time before us. I’ve been waiting for the last three hours foryou; I’ve been up twice and found you asleep. I’ve called on Zossimovtwice; not at home, only fancy! But no matter, he will turn up. AndI’ve been out on my own business, too. You know I’ve been moving to-day,moving with my uncle. I have an uncle living with me now. But that’sno matter, to business. Give me the parcel, Nastasya. We will open itdirectly. And how do you feel now, brother?”
“I am quite well, I am not ill. Razumihin, have you been here long?”
“I tell you I’ve been waiting for the last three hours.”
“No, before.”
“How do you mean?”
“How long have you been coming here?”
“Why I told you all about it this morning. Don’t you remember?”
Raskolnikov pondered. The morning seemed like a dream to him. He couldnot remember alone, and looked inquiringly at Razumihin.
“Hm!” said the latter, “he has forgotten. I fancied then that you werenot quite yourself. Now you are better for your sleep.... You reallylook much better. First-rate! Well, to business. Look here, my dearboy.”
He began untying the bundle, which evidently interested him.
“Believe me, brother, this is something specially near my heart. For wemust make a man of you. Let’s begin from the top. Do you see thiscap?” he said, taking out of the bundle a fairly good though cheap andordinary cap. “Let me try it on.”
“Presently, afterwards,” said Raskolnikov, waving it off pettishly.
“Come, Rodya, my boy, don’t oppose it, afterwards will be too late; andI shan’t sleep all night, for I bought it by guess, without measure.Just right!” he cried triumphantly, fitting it on, “just your size! Aproper head-covering is the first thing in dress and a recommendation inits own way. Tolstyakov, a friend of mine, is always obliged to take offhis pudding basin when he goes into any public place where otherpeople wear their hats or caps. People think he does it from slavishpoliteness, but it’s simply because he is ashamed of his bird’s nest;he is such a boastful fellow! Look, Nastasya, here are two specimens ofheadgear: this Palmerston”--he took from the corner Raskolnikov’s old,battered hat, which for some unknown reason, he called a Palmerston--“orthis jewel! Guess the price, Rodya, what do you suppose I paid for it,Nastasya!” he said, turning to her, seeing that Raskolnikov did notspeak.
“Twenty copecks, no more, I dare say,” answered Nastasya.
“Twenty copecks, silly!” he cried, offended. “Why, nowadays you wouldcost more than that--eighty copecks! And that only because it has beenworn. And it’s bought on condition that when’s it’s worn out, they willgive you another next year. Yes, on my word! Well, now let us pass tothe United States of America, as they called them at school. I assureyou I am proud of these breeches,” and he exhibited to Raskolnikov apair of light, summer trousers of grey woollen material. “No holes, nospots, and quite respectable, although a little worn; and a waistcoatto match, quite in the fashion. And its being worn really is animprovement, it’s softer, smoother.... You see, Rodya, to my thinking,the great thing for getting on in the world is always to keep to theseasons; if you don’t insist on having asparagus in January, you keepyour money in your purse; and it’s the same with this purchase. It’ssummer now, so I’ve been buying summer things--warmer materials will bewanted for autumn, so you will have to throw these away in any case...especially as they will be done for by then from their own lack ofcoherence if not your higher standard of luxury. Come, price them! Whatdo you say? Two roubles twenty-five copecks! And remember the condition:if you wear these out, you will have another suit for nothing! They onlydo business on that system at Fedyaev’s; if you’ve bought a thing once,you are satisfied for life, for you will never go there again of yourown free will. Now for the boots. What do you say? You see that they area bit worn, but they’ll last a couple of months, for it’s foreign workand foreign leather; the secretary of the English Embassy sold them lastweek--he had only worn them six days, but he was very short of cash.Price--a rouble and a half. A bargain?”
“But perhaps they won’t fit,” observed Nastasya.
“Not fit? Just look!” and he pulled out of his pocket Raskolnikov’sold, broken boot, stiffly coated with dry mud. “I did not goempty-handed--they took the size from this monster. We all did our best.And as to your linen, your landlady has seen to that. Here, to beginwith are three shirts, hempen but with a fashionable front.... Wellnow then, eighty copecks the cap, two roubles twenty-five copecks thesuit--together three roubles five copecks--a rouble and a half for theboots--for, you see, they are very good--and that makes four roublesfifty-five copecks; five roubles for the underclothes--they werebought in the lot--which makes exactly nine roubles fifty-five copecks.Forty-five copecks change in coppers. Will you take it? And so, Rodya,you are set up with a complete new rig-out, for your overcoat willserve, and even has a style of its own. That comes from getting one’sclothes from Sharmer’s! As for your socks and other things, I leave themto you; we’ve twenty-five roubles left. And as for Pashenka and payingfor your lodging, don’t you worry. I tell you she’ll trust you foranything. And now, brother, let me change your linen, for I daresay youwill throw off your illness with your shirt.”
“Let me be! I don’t want to!” Raskolnikov waved him off. He had listenedwith disgust to Razumihin’s efforts to be playful about his purchases.
“Come, brother, don’t tell me I’ve been trudging around for nothing,”Razumihin insisted. “Nastasya, don’t be bashful, but help me--that’sit,” and in spite of Raskolnikov’s resistance he changed his linen. Thelatter sank back on the pillows and for a minute or two said nothing.
“It will be long before I get rid of them,” he thought. “What money wasall that bought with?” he asked at last, gazing at the wall.
“Money? Why, your own, what the messenger brought from Vahrushin, yourmother sent it. Have you forgotten that, too?”
“I remember now,” said Raskolnikov after a long, sullen silence.Razumihin looked at him, frowning and uneasy.
The door opened and a tall, stout man whose appearance seemed familiarto Raskolnikov came in.
CHAPTER IV
Zossimov was a tall, fat man with a puffy, colourless, clean-shaven faceand straight flaxen hair. He wore spectacles, and a big gold ring onhis fat finger. He was twenty-seven. He had on a light grey fashionableloose coat, light summer trousers, and everything about him loose,fashionable and spick and span; his linen was irreproachable, hiswatch-chain was massive. In manner he was slow and, as it were,nonchalant, and at the same time studiously free and easy; he madeefforts to conceal his self-importance, but it was apparent at everyinstant. All his acquaintances found him tedious, but said he was cleverat his work.
“I’ve been to you twice to-day, brother. You see, he’s come to himself,”cried Razumihin.
“I see, I see; and how do we feel now, eh?” said Zossimov toRaskolnikov, watching him carefully and, sitting down at the foot of thesofa, he settled himself as comfortably as he could.
“He is still depressed,” Razumihin went on. “We’ve just changed hislinen and he almost cried.”
“That’s very natural; you might have put it off if he did not wishit.... His pulse is first-rate. Is your head still aching, eh?”
“I am well, I am perfectly well!” Raskolnikov declared positivelyand irritably. He raised himself on the sofa and looked at them withglittering eyes, but sank back on to the pillow at once and turned tothe wall. Zossimov watched him intently.
“Very good.... Going on all right,” he said lazily. “Has he eatenanything?”
They told him, and asked what he might have.
“He may have anything... soup, tea... mushrooms and cucumbers, ofcourse, you must not give him; he’d better not have meat either, and...but no need to tell you that!” Razumihin and he looked at eachother. “No more medicine or anything. I’ll look at him again to-morrow.Perhaps, to-day even... but never mind...”
“To-morrow evening I shall take him for a walk,” said Razumihin. “We aregoing to the Yusupov garden and then to the Palais de Cristal.”
“I would not disturb him to-morrow at all, but I don’t know... a little,maybe... but we’ll see.”
“Ach, what a nuisance! I’ve got a house-warming party to-night; it’sonly a step from here. Couldn’t he come? He could lie on the sofa. Youare coming?” Razumihin said to Zossimov. “Don’t forget, you promised.”
“All right, only rather later. What are you going to do?”
“Oh, nothing--tea, vodka, herrings. There will be a pie... just ourfriends.”
“And who?”
“All neighbours here, almost all new friends, except my old uncle, andhe is new too--he only arrived in Petersburg yesterday to see to somebusiness of his. We meet once in five years.”
“What is he?”
“He’s been stagnating all his life as a district postmaster; gets alittle pension. He is sixty-five--not worth talking about.... But Iam fond of him. Porfiry Petrovitch, the head of the InvestigationDepartment here... But you know him.”
“Is he a relation of yours, too?”
“A very distant one. But why are you scowling? Because you quarrelledonce, won’t you come then?”
“I don’t care a damn for him.”
“So much the better. Well, there will be some students, a teacher, agovernment clerk, a musician, an officer and Zametov.”
“Do tell me, please, what you or he”--Zossimov nodded atRaskolnikov--“can have in common with this Zametov?”
“Oh, you particular gentleman! Principles! You are worked by principles,as it were by springs; you won’t venture to turn round on your ownaccount. If a man is a nice fellow, that’s the only principle I go upon.Zametov is a delightful person.”
“Though he does take bribes.”
“Well, he does! and what of it? I don’t care if he does take bribes,”Razumihin cried with unnatural irritability. “I don’t praise him fortaking bribes. I only say he is a nice man in his own way! But if onelooks at men in all ways--are there many good ones left? Why, I am sureI shouldn’t be worth a baked onion myself... perhaps with you thrownin.”
“That’s too little; I’d give two for you.”
“And I wouldn’t give more than one for you. No more of your jokes!Zametov is no more than a boy. I can pull his hair and one must draw himnot repel him. You’ll never improve a man by repelling him, especiallya boy. One has to be twice as careful with a boy. Oh, you progressivedullards! You don’t understand. You harm yourselves running another mandown.... But if you want to know, we really have something in common.”
“I should like to know what.”
“Why, it’s all about a house-painter.... We are getting him out ofa mess! Though indeed there’s nothing to fear now. The matter isabsolutely self-evident. We only put on steam.”
“A painter?”
“Why, haven’t I told you about it? I only told you the beginning thenabout the murder of the old pawnbroker-woman. Well, the painter is mixedup in it...”
“Oh, I heard about that murder before and was rather interested in it...partly... for one reason.... I read about it in the papers, too....”
“Lizaveta was murdered, too,” Nastasya blurted out, suddenly addressingRaskolnikov. She remained in the room all the time, standing by the doorlistening.
“Lizaveta,” murmured Raskolnikov hardly audibly.
“Lizaveta, who sold old clothes. Didn’t you know her? She used to comehere. She mended a shirt for you, too.”
Raskolnikov turned to the wall where in the dirty, yellow paper hepicked out one clumsy, white flower with brown lines on it and beganexamining how many petals there were in it, how many scallops in thepetals and how many lines on them. He felt his arms and legs as lifelessas though they had been cut off. He did not attempt to move, but staredobstinately at the flower.
“But what about the painter?” Zossimov interrupted Nastasya’s chatterwith marked displeasure. She sighed and was silent.
“Why, he was accused of the murder,” Razumihin went on hotly.
“Was there evidence against him then?”
“Evidence, indeed! Evidence that was no evidence, and that’s what wehave to prove. It was just as they pitched on those fellows, Koch andPestryakov, at first. Foo! how stupidly it’s all done, it makes onesick, though it’s not one’s business! Pestryakov may be comingto-night.... By the way, Rodya, you’ve heard about the business already;it happened before you were ill, the day before you fainted at thepolice office while they were talking about it.”
Zossimov looked curiously at Raskolnikov. He did not stir.
“But I say, Razumihin, I wonder at you. What a busybody you are!”Zossimov observed.
“Maybe I am, but we will get him off anyway,” shouted Razumihin,bringing his fist down on the table. “What’s the most offensive is nottheir lying--one can always forgive lying--lying is a delightful thing,for it leads to truth--what is offensive is that they lie and worshiptheir own lying.... I respect Porfiry, but... What threw them out atfirst? The door was locked, and when they came back with the porterit was open. So it followed that Koch and Pestryakov were themurderers--that was their logic!”
“But don’t excite yourself; they simply detained them, they could nothelp that.... And, by the way, I’ve met that man Koch. He used to buyunredeemed pledges from the old woman? Eh?”
“Yes, he is a swindler. He buys up bad debts, too. He makes a professionof it. But enough of him! Do you know what makes me angry? It’s theirsickening rotten, petrified routine.... And this case might be the meansof introducing a new method. One can show from the psychological dataalone how to get on the track of the real man. ‘We have facts,’ theysay. But facts are not everything--at least half the business lies inhow you interpret them!”
“Can you interpret them, then?”
“Anyway, one can’t hold one’s tongue when one has a feeling, a tangiblefeeling, that one might be a help if only.... Eh! Do you know thedetails of the case?”
“I am waiting to hear about the painter.”
“Oh, yes! Well, here’s the story. Early on the third day after themurder, when they were still dandling Koch and Pestryakov--though theyaccounted for every step they took and it was as plain as a pikestaff--anunexpected fact turned up. A peasant called Dushkin, who keeps adram-shop facing the house, brought to the police office a jeweller’scase containing some gold ear-rings, and told a long rigamarole. ‘Theday before yesterday, just after eight o’clock’--mark the day and thehour!--‘a journeyman house-painter, Nikolay, who had been in to see mealready that day, brought me this box of gold ear-rings and stones, andasked me to give him two roubles for them. When I asked him where he gotthem, he said that he picked them up in the street. I did not ask himanything more.’ I am telling you Dushkin’s story. ‘I gave him a note’--arouble that is--‘for I thought if he did not pawn it with me he wouldwith another. It would all come to the same thing--he’d spend it ondrink, so the thing had better be with me. The further you hide itthe quicker you will find it, and if anything turns up, if I hear anyrumours, I’ll take it to the police.’ Of course, that’s all taradiddle;he lies like a horse, for I know this Dushkin, he is a pawnbroker anda receiver of stolen goods, and he did not cheat Nikolay out of athirty-rouble trinket in order to give it to the police. He was simplyafraid. But no matter, to return to Dushkin’s story. ‘I’ve knownthis peasant, Nikolay Dementyev, from a child; he comes from the sameprovince and district of Zaraïsk, we are both Ryazan men. And thoughNikolay is not a drunkard, he drinks, and I knew he had a job in thathouse, painting work with Dmitri, who comes from the same village, too.As soon as he got the rouble he changed it, had a couple of glasses,took his change and went out. But I did not see Dmitri with him then.And the next day I heard that someone had murdered Alyona Ivanovna andher sister, Lizaveta Ivanovna, with an axe. I knew them, and I feltsuspicious about the ear-rings at once, for I knew the murdered womanlent money on pledges. I went to the house, and began to make carefulinquiries without saying a word to anyone. First of all I asked, “IsNikolay here?” Dmitri told me that Nikolay had gone off on the spree; hehad come home at daybreak drunk, stayed in the house about ten minutes,and went out again. Dmitri didn’t see him again and is finishing thejob alone. And their job is on the same staircase as the murder, onthe second floor. When I heard all that I did not say a word toanyone’--that’s Dushkin’s tale--‘but I found out what I could aboutthe murder, and went home feeling as suspicious as ever. And at eighto’clock this morning’--that was the third day, you understand--‘I sawNikolay coming in, not sober, though not to say very drunk--he couldunderstand what was said to him. He sat down on the bench and did notspeak. There was only one stranger in the bar and a man I knew asleepon a bench and our two boys. “Have you seen Dmitri?” said I. “No, Ihaven’t,” said he. “And you’ve not been here either?” “Not since the daybefore yesterday,” said he. “And where did you sleep last night?”“In Peski, with the Kolomensky men.” “And where did you get thoseear-rings?” I asked. “I found them in the street,” and the way he saidit was a bit queer; he did not look at me. “Did you hear what happenedthat very evening, at that very hour, on that same staircase?” said I.“No,” said he, “I had not heard,” and all the while he was listening,his eyes were staring out of his head and he turned as white as chalk. Itold him all about it and he took his hat and began getting up. I wantedto keep him. “Wait a bit, Nikolay,” said I, “won’t you have a drink?”And I signed to the boy to hold the door, and I came out from behind thebar; but he darted out and down the street to the turning at a run.I have not seen him since. Then my doubts were at an end--it was hisdoing, as clear as could be....’”
“I should think so,” said Zossimov.
“Wait! Hear the end. Of course they sought high and low for Nikolay;they detained Dushkin and searched his house; Dmitri, too, was arrested;the Kolomensky men also were turned inside out. And the day beforeyesterday they arrested Nikolay in a tavern at the end of the town. Hehad gone there, taken the silver cross off his neck and asked for a dramfor it. They gave it to him. A few minutes afterwards the woman wentto the cowshed, and through a crack in the wall she saw in the stableadjoining he had made a noose of his sash from the beam, stood on ablock of wood, and was trying to put his neck in the noose. The womanscreeched her hardest; people ran in. ‘So that’s what you are up to!’‘Take me,’ he says, ‘to such-and-such a police officer; I’ll confesseverything.’ Well, they took him to that police station--that ishere--with a suitable escort. So they asked him this and that, how oldhe is, ‘twenty-two,’ and so on. At the question, ‘When you were workingwith Dmitri, didn’t you see anyone on the staircase at such-and-such atime?’--answer: ‘To be sure folks may have gone up and down, but I didnot notice them.’ ‘And didn’t you hear anything, any noise, and so on?’‘We heard nothing special.’ ‘And did you hear, Nikolay, that on the sameday Widow So-and-so and her sister were murdered and robbed?’ ‘Inever knew a thing about it. The first I heard of it was from AfanasyPavlovitch the day before yesterday.’ ‘And where did you find theear-rings?’ ‘I found them on the pavement.’ ‘Why didn’t you go to workwith Dmitri the other day?’ ‘Because I was drinking.’ ‘And where wereyou drinking?’ ‘Oh, in such-and-such a place.’ ‘Why did you run awayfrom Dushkin’s?’ ‘Because I was awfully frightened.’ ‘What wereyou frightened of?’ ‘That I should be accused.’ ‘How could you befrightened, if you felt free from guilt?’ Now, Zossimov, you may notbelieve me, that question was put literally in those words. I know itfor a fact, it was repeated to me exactly! What do you say to that?”
“Well, anyway, there’s the evidence.”
“I am not talking of the evidence now, I am talking about that question,of their own idea of themselves. Well, so they squeezed and squeezedhim and he confessed: ‘I did not find it in the street, but in the flatwhere I was painting with Dmitri.’ ‘And how was that?’ ‘Why, Dmitri andI were painting there all day, and we were just getting ready to go, andDmitri took a brush and painted my face, and he ran off and I after him.I ran after him, shouting my hardest, and at the bottom of the stairs Iran right against the porter and some gentlemen--and how many gentlemenwere there I don’t remember. And the porter swore at me, and the otherporter swore, too, and the porter’s wife came out, and swore at us, too;and a gentleman came into the entry with a lady, and he swore at us,too, for Dmitri and I lay right across the way. I got hold of Dmitri’shair and knocked him down and began beating him. And Dmitri, too, caughtme by the hair and began beating me. But we did it all not for temperbut in a friendly way, for sport. And then Dmitri escaped and ran intothe street, and I ran after him; but I did not catch him, and went backto the flat alone; I had to clear up my things. I began putting themtogether, expecting Dmitri to come, and there in the passage, in thecorner by the door, I stepped on the box. I saw it lying there wrappedup in paper. I took off the paper, saw some little hooks, undid them,and in the box were the ear-rings....’”
“Behind the door? Lying behind the door? Behind the door?” Raskolnikovcried suddenly, staring with a blank look of terror at Razumihin, and heslowly sat up on the sofa, leaning on his hand.
“Yes... why? What’s the matter? What’s wrong?” Razumihin, too, got upfrom his seat.
“Nothing,” Raskolnikov answered faintly, turning to the wall. All weresilent for a while.
“He must have waked from a dream,” Razumihin said at last, lookinginquiringly at Zossimov. The latter slightly shook his head.
“Well, go on,” said Zossimov. “What next?”
“What next? As soon as he saw the ear-rings, forgetting Dmitri andeverything, he took up his cap and ran to Dushkin and, as we know, gota rouble from him. He told a lie saying he found them in the street, andwent off drinking. He keeps repeating his old story about the murder:‘I know nothing of it, never heard of it till the day before yesterday.’‘And why didn’t you come to the police till now?’ ‘I was frightened.’‘And why did you try to hang yourself?’ ‘From anxiety.’ ‘What anxiety?’‘That I should be accused of it.’ Well, that’s the whole story. And nowwhat do you suppose they deduced from that?”
“Why, there’s no supposing. There’s a clue, such as it is, a fact. Youwouldn’t have your painter set free?”
“Now they’ve simply taken him for the murderer. They haven’t a shadow ofdoubt.”
“That’s nonsense. You are excited. But what about the ear-rings? Youmust admit that, if on the very same day and hour ear-rings from the oldwoman’s box have come into Nikolay’s hands, they must have come theresomehow. That’s a good deal in such a case.”
“How did they get there? How did they get there?” cried Razumihin.“How can you, a doctor, whose duty it is to study man and who has moreopportunity than anyone else for studying human nature--how can you failto see the character of the man in the whole story? Don’t you see atonce that the answers he has given in the examination are the holytruth? They came into his hand precisely as he has told us--he steppedon the box and picked it up.”
“The holy truth! But didn’t he own himself that he told a lie at first?”
“Listen to me, listen attentively. The porter and Koch and Pestryakovand the other porter and the wife of the first porter and the woman whowas sitting in the porter’s lodge and the man Kryukov, who had just gotout of a cab at that minute and went in at the entry with a lady on hisarm, that is eight or ten witnesses, agree that Nikolay had Dmitri onthe ground, was lying on him beating him, while Dmitri hung on to hishair, beating him, too. They lay right across the way, blocking thethoroughfare. They were sworn at on all sides while they ‘like children’(the very words of the witnesses) were falling over one another,squealing, fighting and laughing with the funniest faces, and, chasingone another like children, they ran into the street. Now take carefulnote. The bodies upstairs were warm, you understand, warm when theyfound them! If they, or Nikolay alone, had murdered them and broken openthe boxes, or simply taken part in the robbery, allow me to ask you onequestion: do their state of mind, their squeals and giggles and childishscuffling at the gate fit in with axes, bloodshed, fiendish cunning,robbery? They’d just killed them, not five or ten minutes before, forthe bodies were still warm, and at once, leaving the flat open, knowingthat people would go there at once, flinging away their booty, theyrolled about like children, laughing and attracting general attention.And there are a dozen witnesses to swear to that!”
“Of course it is strange! It’s impossible, indeed, but...”
“No, brother, no _buts_. And if the ear-rings being found in Nikolay’shands at the very day and hour of the murder constitutes an importantpiece of circumstantial evidence against him--although the explanationgiven by him accounts for it, and therefore it does not tell seriouslyagainst him--one must take into consideration the facts which prove himinnocent, especially as they are facts that _cannot be denied_. Anddo you suppose, from the character of our legal system, that they willaccept, or that they are in a position to accept, this fact--restingsimply on a psychological impossibility--as irrefutable and conclusivelybreaking down the circumstantial evidence for the prosecution? No, theywon’t accept it, they certainly won’t, because they found the jewel-caseand the man tried to hang himself, ‘which he could not have done if hehadn’t felt guilty.’ That’s the point, that’s what excites me, you mustunderstand!”
“Oh, I see you are excited! Wait a bit. I forgot to ask you; what proofis there that the box came from the old woman?”
“That’s been proved,” said Razumihin with apparent reluctance, frowning.“Koch recognised the jewel-case and gave the name of the owner, whoproved conclusively that it was his.”
“That’s bad. Now another point. Did anyone see Nikolay at the timethat Koch and Pestryakov were going upstairs at first, and is there noevidence about that?”
“Nobody did see him,” Razumihin answered with vexation. “That’s theworst of it. Even Koch and Pestryakov did not notice them on their wayupstairs, though, indeed, their evidence could not have been worth much.They said they saw the flat was open, and that there must be work goingon in it, but they took no special notice and could not remember whetherthere actually were men at work in it.”
“Hm!... So the only evidence for the defence is that they were beatingone another and laughing. That constitutes a strong presumption, but...How do you explain the facts yourself?”
“How do I explain them? What is there to explain? It’s clear. At anyrate, the direction in which explanation is to be sought is clear, andthe jewel-case points to it. The real murderer dropped those ear-rings.The murderer was upstairs, locked in, when Koch and Pestryakov knockedat the door. Koch, like an ass, did not stay at the door; so themurderer popped out and ran down, too; for he had no other way ofescape. He hid from Koch, Pestryakov and the porter in the flat whenNikolay and Dmitri had just run out of it. He stopped there while theporter and others were going upstairs, waited till they were out ofhearing, and then went calmly downstairs at the very minute when Dmitriand Nikolay ran out into the street and there was no one in the entry;possibly he was seen, but not noticed. There are lots of people goingin and out. He must have dropped the ear-rings out of his pocket whenhe stood behind the door, and did not notice he dropped them, because hehad other things to think of. The jewel-case is a conclusive proof thathe did stand there.... That’s how I explain it.”
“Too clever! No, my boy, you’re too clever. That beats everything.”
“But, why, why?”
“Why, because everything fits too well... it’s too melodramatic.”
“A-ach!” Razumihin was exclaiming, but at that moment the door openedand a personage came in who was a stranger to all present.
CHAPTER V
This was a gentleman no longer young, of a stiff and portly appearance,and a cautious and sour countenance. He began by stopping short in thedoorway, staring about him with offensive and undisguised astonishment,as though asking himself what sort of place he had come to.Mistrustfully and with an affectation of being alarmed and almostaffronted, he scanned Raskolnikov’s low and narrow “cabin.” With thesame amazement he stared at Raskolnikov, who lay undressed, dishevelled,unwashed, on his miserable dirty sofa, looking fixedly at him. Then withthe same deliberation he scrutinised the uncouth, unkempt figure andunshaven face of Razumihin, who looked him boldly and inquiringly in theface without rising from his seat. A constrained silence lasted for acouple of minutes, and then, as might be expected, some scene-shiftingtook place. Reflecting, probably from certain fairly unmistakable signs,that he would get nothing in this “cabin” by attempting to overawe them,the gentleman softened somewhat, and civilly, though with some severity,emphasising every syllable of his question, addressed Zossimov:
“Rodion Romanovitch Raskolnikov, a student, or formerly a student?”
Zossimov made a slight movement, and would have answered, had notRazumihin anticipated him.
“Here he is lying on the sofa! What do you want?”
This familiar “what do you want” seemed to cut the ground from thefeet of the pompous gentleman. He was turning to Razumihin, but checkedhimself in time and turned to Zossimov again.
“This is Raskolnikov,” mumbled Zossimov, nodding towards him. Then hegave a prolonged yawn, opening his mouth as wide as possible. Then helazily put his hand into his waistcoat-pocket, pulled out a huge goldwatch in a round hunter’s case, opened it, looked at it and as slowlyand lazily proceeded to put it back.
Raskolnikov himself lay without speaking, on his back, gazingpersistently, though without understanding, at the stranger. Now thathis face was turned away from the strange flower on the paper, itwas extremely pale and wore a look of anguish, as though he had justundergone an agonising operation or just been taken from the rack. Butthe new-comer gradually began to arouse his attention, then his wonder,then suspicion and even alarm. When Zossimov said “This is Raskolnikov”he jumped up quickly, sat on the sofa and with an almost defiant, butweak and breaking, voice articulated:
“Yes, I am Raskolnikov! What do you want?”
The visitor scrutinised him and pronounced impressively:
“Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin. I believe I have reason to hope that my nameis not wholly unknown to you?”
But Raskolnikov, who had expected something quite different, gazedblankly and dreamily at him, making no reply, as though he heard thename of Pyotr Petrovitch for the first time.
“Is it possible that you can up to the present have received noinformation?” asked Pyotr Petrovitch, somewhat disconcerted.
In reply Raskolnikov sank languidly back on the pillow, put his handsbehind his head and gazed at the ceiling. A look of dismay came intoLuzhin’s face. Zossimov and Razumihin stared at him more inquisitivelythan ever, and at last he showed unmistakable signs of embarrassment.
“I had presumed and calculated,” he faltered, “that a letter posted morethan ten days, if not a fortnight ago...”
“I say, why are you standing in the doorway?” Razumihin interruptedsuddenly. “If you’ve something to say, sit down. Nastasya and you are socrowded. Nastasya, make room. Here’s a chair, thread your way in!”
He moved his chair back from the table, made a little space between thetable and his knees, and waited in a rather cramped position for thevisitor to “thread his way in.” The minute was so chosen that it wasimpossible to refuse, and the visitor squeezed his way through, hurryingand stumbling. Reaching the chair, he sat down, looking suspiciously atRazumihin.
“No need to be nervous,” the latter blurted out. “Rodya has been ill forthe last five days and delirious for three, but now he is recovering andhas got an appetite. This is his doctor, who has just had a look at him.I am a comrade of Rodya’s, like him, formerly a student, and now I amnursing him; so don’t you take any notice of us, but go on with yourbusiness.”
“Thank you. But shall I not disturb the invalid by my presence andconversation?” Pyotr Petrovitch asked of Zossimov.
“N-no,” mumbled Zossimov; “you may amuse him.” He yawned again.
“He has been conscious a long time, since the morning,” went onRazumihin, whose familiarity seemed so much like unaffected good-naturethat Pyotr Petrovitch began to be more cheerful, partly, perhaps,because this shabby and impudent person had introduced himself as astudent.
“Your mamma,” began Luzhin.
“Hm!” Razumihin cleared his throat loudly. Luzhin looked at himinquiringly.
“That’s all right, go on.”
Luzhin shrugged his shoulders.
“Your mamma had commenced a letter to you while I was sojourning inher neighbourhood. On my arrival here I purposely allowed a few days toelapse before coming to see you, in order that I might be fullyassured that you were in full possession of the tidings; but now, to myastonishment...”
“I know, I know!” Raskolnikov cried suddenly with impatient vexation.“So you are the _fiancé_? I know, and that’s enough!”
There was no doubt about Pyotr Petrovitch’s being offended this time,but he said nothing. He made a violent effort to understand what it allmeant. There was a moment’s silence.
Meanwhile Raskolnikov, who had turned a little towards him when heanswered, began suddenly staring at him again with marked curiosity, asthough he had not had a good look at him yet, or as though somethingnew had struck him; he rose from his pillow on purpose to stare athim. There certainly was something peculiar in Pyotr Petrovitch’s wholeappearance, something which seemed to justify the title of “fiancé” sounceremoniously applied to him. In the first place, it was evident, fartoo much so indeed, that Pyotr Petrovitch had made eager use of his fewdays in the capital to get himself up and rig himself out in expectationof his betrothed--a perfectly innocent and permissible proceeding,indeed. Even his own, perhaps too complacent, consciousness of theagreeable improvement in his appearance might have been forgiven in suchcircumstances, seeing that Pyotr Petrovitch had taken up the rôle offiancé. All his clothes were fresh from the tailor’s and were allright, except for being too new and too distinctly appropriate. Eventhe stylish new round hat had the same significance. Pyotr Petrovitchtreated it too respectfully and held it too carefully in his hands. Theexquisite pair of lavender gloves, real Louvain, told the same tale,if only from the fact of his not wearing them, but carrying them inhis hand for show. Light and youthful colours predominated in PyotrPetrovitch’s attire. He wore a charming summer jacket of a fawn shade,light thin trousers, a waistcoat of the same, new and fine linen, acravat of the lightest cambric with pink stripes on it, and the bestof it was, this all suited Pyotr Petrovitch. His very fresh and evenhandsome face looked younger than his forty-five years at all times.His dark, mutton-chop whiskers made an agreeable setting on both sides,growing thickly upon his shining, clean-shaven chin. Even his hair,touched here and there with grey, though it had been combed and curledat a hairdresser’s, did not give him a stupid appearance, as curled hairusually does, by inevitably suggesting a German on his wedding-day.If there really was something unpleasing and repulsive in his rathergood-looking and imposing countenance, it was due to quite othercauses. After scanning Mr. Luzhin unceremoniously, Raskolnikov smiledmalignantly, sank back on the pillow and stared at the ceiling asbefore.
But Mr. Luzhin hardened his heart and seemed to determine to take nonotice of their oddities.
“I feel the greatest regret at finding you in this situation,” he began,again breaking the silence with an effort. “If I had been aware of yourillness I should have come earlier. But you know what business is. Ihave, too, a very important legal affair in the Senate, not to mentionother preoccupations which you may well conjecture. I am expecting yourmamma and sister any minute.”
Raskolnikov made a movement and seemed about to speak; his face showedsome excitement. Pyotr Petrovitch paused, waited, but as nothingfollowed, he went on:
“... Any minute. I have found a lodging for them on their arrival.”
“Where?” asked Raskolnikov weakly.
“Very near here, in Bakaleyev’s house.”
“That’s in Voskresensky,” put in Razumihin. “There are two storeys ofrooms, let by a merchant called Yushin; I’ve been there.”
“Yes, rooms...”
“A disgusting place--filthy, stinking and, what’s more, of doubtfulcharacter. Things have happened there, and there are all sorts of queerpeople living there. And I went there about a scandalous business. It’scheap, though...”
“I could not, of course, find out so much about it, for I am a strangerin Petersburg myself,” Pyotr Petrovitch replied huffily. “However, thetwo rooms are exceedingly clean, and as it is for so short a time...I have already taken a permanent, that is, our future flat,” he said,addressing Raskolnikov, “and I am having it done up. And meanwhile I ammyself cramped for room in a lodging with my friend Andrey SemyonovitchLebeziatnikov, in the flat of Madame Lippevechsel; it was he who told meof Bakaleyev’s house, too...”
“Lebeziatnikov?” said Raskolnikov slowly, as if recalling something.
“Yes, Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov, a clerk in the Ministry. Do youknow him?”
“Yes... no,” Raskolnikov answered.
“Excuse me, I fancied so from your inquiry. I was once his guardian....A very nice young man and advanced. I like to meet young people: onelearns new things from them.” Luzhin looked round hopefully at them all.
“How do you mean?” asked Razumihin.
“In the most serious and essential matters,” Pyotr Petrovitch replied,as though delighted at the question. “You see, it’s ten years since Ivisited Petersburg. All the novelties, reforms, ideas have reached us inthe provinces, but to see it all more clearly one must be in Petersburg.And it’s my notion that you observe and learn most by watching theyounger generation. And I confess I am delighted...”
“At what?”
“Your question is a wide one. I may be mistaken, but I fancy I findclearer views, more, so to say, criticism, more practicality...”
“That’s true,” Zossimov let drop.
“Nonsense! There’s no practicality.” Razumihin flew at him.“Practicality is a difficult thing to find; it does not drop down fromheaven. And for the last two hundred years we have been divorced fromall practical life. Ideas, if you like, are fermenting,” he said toPyotr Petrovitch, “and desire for good exists, though it’s in a childishform, and honesty you may find, although there are crowds of brigands.Anyway, there’s no practicality. Practicality goes well shod.”
“I don’t agree with you,” Pyotr Petrovitch replied, with evidentenjoyment. “Of course, people do get carried away and make mistakes,but one must have indulgence; those mistakes are merely evidence ofenthusiasm for the cause and of abnormal external environment. If littlehas been done, the time has been but short; of means I will not speak.It’s my personal view, if you care to know, that something has beenaccomplished already. New valuable ideas, new valuable works arecirculating in the place of our old dreamy and romantic authors.Literature is taking a maturer form, many injurious prejudices have beenrooted up and turned into ridicule.... In a word, we have cut ourselvesoff irrevocably from the past, and that, to my thinking, is a greatthing...”
“He’s learnt it by heart to show off!” Raskolnikov pronounced suddenly.
“What?” asked Pyotr Petrovitch, not catching his words; but he receivedno reply.
“That’s all true,” Zossimov hastened to interpose.
“Isn’t it so?” Pyotr Petrovitch went on, glancing affably at Zossimov.“You must admit,” he went on, addressing Razumihin with a shade oftriumph and superciliousness--he almost added “young man”--“that thereis an advance, or, as they say now, progress in the name of science andeconomic truth...”
“A commonplace.”
“No, not a commonplace! Hitherto, for instance, if I were told, ‘lovethy neighbour,’ what came of it?” Pyotr Petrovitch went on, perhaps withexcessive haste. “It came to my tearing my coat in half to share with myneighbour and we both were left half naked. As a Russian proverb hasit, ‘Catch several hares and you won’t catch one.’ Science now tellsus, love yourself before all men, for everything in the world rests onself-interest. You love yourself and manage your own affairs properlyand your coat remains whole. Economic truth adds that the better privateaffairs are organised in society--the more whole coats, so to say--thefirmer are its foundations and the better is the common welfareorganised too. Therefore, in acquiring wealth solely and exclusively formyself, I am acquiring, so to speak, for all, and helping to bring topass my neighbour’s getting a little more than a torn coat; and that notfrom private, personal liberality, but as a consequence of the generaladvance. The idea is simple, but unhappily it has been a long timereaching us, being hindered by idealism and sentimentality. And yet itwould seem to want very little wit to perceive it...”
“Excuse me, I’ve very little wit myself,” Razumihin cut in sharply,“and so let us drop it. I began this discussion with an object, but I’vegrown so sick during the last three years of this chattering to amuseoneself, of this incessant flow of commonplaces, always the same, that,by Jove, I blush even when other people talk like that. You are in ahurry, no doubt, to exhibit your acquirements; and I don’t blame you,that’s quite pardonable. I only wanted to find out what sort of man youare, for so many unscrupulous people have got hold of the progressivecause of late and have so distorted in their own interests everythingthey touched, that the whole cause has been dragged in the mire. That’senough!”
“Excuse me, sir,” said Luzhin, affronted, and speaking with excessivedignity. “Do you mean to suggest so unceremoniously that I too...”
“Oh, my dear sir... how could I?... Come, that’s enough,” Razumihinconcluded, and he turned abruptly to Zossimov to continue their previousconversation.
Pyotr Petrovitch had the good sense to accept the disavowal. He made uphis mind to take leave in another minute or two.
“I trust our acquaintance,” he said, addressing Raskolnikov, “may, uponyour recovery and in view of the circumstances of which you are aware,become closer... Above all, I hope for your return to health...”
Raskolnikov did not even turn his head. Pyotr Petrovitch began gettingup from his chair.
“One of her customers must have killed her,” Zossimov declaredpositively.
“Not a doubt of it,” replied Razumihin. “Porfiry doesn’t give hisopinion, but is examining all who have left pledges with her there.”
“Examining them?” Raskolnikov asked aloud.
“Yes. What then?”
“Nothing.”
“How does he get hold of them?” asked Zossimov.
“Koch has given the names of some of them, other names are on thewrappers of the pledges and some have come forward of themselves.”
“It must have been a cunning and practised ruffian! The boldness of it!The coolness!”
“That’s just what it wasn’t!” interposed Razumihin. “That’s what throwsyou all off the scent. But I maintain that he is not cunning, notpractised, and probably this was his first crime! The supposition thatit was a calculated crime and a cunning criminal doesn’t work. Supposehim to have been inexperienced, and it’s clear that it was only a chancethat saved him--and chance may do anything. Why, he did not foreseeobstacles, perhaps! And how did he set to work? He took jewels worthten or twenty roubles, stuffing his pockets with them, ransacked theold woman’s trunks, her rags--and they found fifteen hundred roubles,besides notes, in a box in the top drawer of the chest! He did not knowhow to rob; he could only murder. It was his first crime, I assure you,his first crime; he lost his head. And he got off more by luck than goodcounsel!”
“You are talking of the murder of the old pawnbroker, I believe?” PyotrPetrovitch put in, addressing Zossimov. He was standing, hat and glovesin hand, but before departing he felt disposed to throw off a few moreintellectual phrases. He was evidently anxious to make a favourableimpression and his vanity overcame his prudence.
“Yes. You’ve heard of it?”
“Oh, yes, being in the neighbourhood.”
“Do you know the details?”
“I can’t say that; but another circumstance interests me in thecase--the whole question, so to say. Not to speak of the fact that crimehas been greatly on the increase among the lower classes during the lastfive years, not to speak of the cases of robbery and arson everywhere,what strikes me as the strangest thing is that in the higher classes,too, crime is increasing proportionately. In one place one hears of astudent’s robbing the mail on the high road; in another place people ofgood social position forge false banknotes; in Moscow of late a wholegang has been captured who used to forge lottery tickets, and one ofthe ringleaders was a lecturer in universal history; then our secretaryabroad was murdered from some obscure motive of gain.... And if this oldwoman, the pawnbroker, has been murdered by someone of a higher classin society--for peasants don’t pawn gold trinkets--how are we to explainthis demoralisation of the civilised part of our society?”
“There are many economic changes,” put in Zossimov.
“How are we to explain it?” Razumihin caught him up. “It might beexplained by our inveterate impracticality.”
“How do you mean?”
“What answer had your lecturer in Moscow to make to the question why hewas forging notes? ‘Everybody is getting rich one way or another, so Iwant to make haste to get rich too.’ I don’t remember the exact words,but the upshot was that he wants money for nothing, without waiting orworking! We’ve grown used to having everything ready-made, to walkingon crutches, to having our food chewed for us. Then the great hourstruck,[*] and every man showed himself in his true colours.”
[*] The emancipation of the serfs in 1861 is meant.--TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.
“But morality? And so to speak, principles...”
“But why do you worry about it?” Raskolnikov interposed suddenly. “It’sin accordance with your theory!”
“In accordance with my theory?”
“Why, carry out logically the theory you were advocating just now, andit follows that people may be killed...”
“Upon my word!” cried Luzhin.
“No, that’s not so,” put in Zossimov.
Raskolnikov lay with a white face and twitching upper lip, breathingpainfully.
“There’s a measure in all things,” Luzhin went on superciliously.“Economic ideas are not an incitement to murder, and one has but tosuppose...”
“And is it true,” Raskolnikov interposed once more suddenly, again in avoice quivering with fury and delight in insulting him, “is it true thatyou told your _fiancée_... within an hour of her acceptance, that whatpleased you most... was that she was a beggar... because it was betterto raise a wife from poverty, so that you may have complete control overher, and reproach her with your being her benefactor?”
“Upon my word,” Luzhin cried wrathfully and irritably, crimson withconfusion, “to distort my words in this way! Excuse me, allow me toassure you that the report which has reached you, or rather, let me say,has been conveyed to you, has no foundation in truth, and I... suspectwho... in a word... this arrow... in a word, your mamma... She seemedto me in other things, with all her excellent qualities, of a somewhathigh-flown and romantic way of thinking.... But I was a thousand milesfrom supposing that she would misunderstand and misrepresent things inso fanciful a way.... And indeed... indeed...”
“I tell you what,” cried Raskolnikov, raising himself on his pillow andfixing his piercing, glittering eyes upon him, “I tell you what.”
“What?” Luzhin stood still, waiting with a defiant and offended face.Silence lasted for some seconds.
“Why, if ever again... you dare to mention a single word... about mymother... I shall send you flying downstairs!”
“What’s the matter with you?” cried Razumihin.
“So that’s how it is?” Luzhin turned pale and bit his lip. “Let me tellyou, sir,” he began deliberately, doing his utmost to restrain himselfbut breathing hard, “at the first moment I saw you you were ill-disposedto me, but I remained here on purpose to find out more. I could forgivea great deal in a sick man and a connection, but you... never afterthis...”
“I am not ill,” cried Raskolnikov.
“So much the worse...”
“Go to hell!”
But Luzhin was already leaving without finishing his speech, squeezingbetween the table and the chair; Razumihin got up this time to let himpass. Without glancing at anyone, and not even nodding to Zossimov, whohad for some time been making signs to him to let the sick man alone,he went out, lifting his hat to the level of his shoulders to avoidcrushing it as he stooped to go out of the door. And even the curve ofhis spine was expressive of the horrible insult he had received.
“How could you--how could you!” Razumihin said, shaking his head inperplexity.
“Let me alone--let me alone all of you!” Raskolnikov cried in a frenzy.“Will you ever leave off tormenting me? I am not afraid of you! I amnot afraid of anyone, anyone now! Get away from me! I want to be alone,alone, alone!”
“Come along,” said Zossimov, nodding to Razumihin.
“But we can’t leave him like this!”
“Come along,” Zossimov repeated insistently, and he went out. Razumihinthought a minute and ran to overtake him.
“It might be worse not to obey him,” said Zossimov on the stairs. “Hemustn’t be irritated.”
“What’s the matter with him?”
“If only he could get some favourable shock, that’s what would do it! Atfirst he was better.... You know he has got something on his mind! Somefixed idea weighing on him.... I am very much afraid so; he must have!”
“Perhaps it’s that gentleman, Pyotr Petrovitch. From his conversationI gather he is going to marry his sister, and that he had received aletter about it just before his illness....”
“Yes, confound the man! he may have upset the case altogether. But haveyou noticed, he takes no interest in anything, he does not respond toanything except one point on which he seems excited--that’s the murder?”
“Yes, yes,” Razumihin agreed, “I noticed that, too. He is interested,frightened. It gave him a shock on the day he was ill in the policeoffice; he fainted.”
“Tell me more about that this evening and I’ll tell you somethingafterwards. He interests me very much! In half an hour I’ll go and seehim again.... There’ll be no inflammation though.”
“Thanks! And I’ll wait with Pashenka meantime and will keep watch on himthrough Nastasya....”
Raskolnikov, left alone, looked with impatience and misery at Nastasya,but she still lingered.
“Won’t you have some tea now?” she asked.
“Later! I am sleepy! Leave me.”
He turned abruptly to the wall; Nastasya went out.
CHAPTER VI
But as soon as she went out, he got up, latched the door, undid theparcel which Razumihin had brought in that evening and had tied up againand began dressing. Strange to say, he seemed immediately to have becomeperfectly calm; not a trace of his recent delirium nor of the panicfear that had haunted him of late. It was the first moment of a strangesudden calm. His movements were precise and definite; a firm purpose wasevident in them. “To-day, to-day,” he muttered to himself. He understoodthat he was still weak, but his intense spiritual concentration gave himstrength and self-confidence. He hoped, moreover, that he would notfall down in the street. When he had dressed in entirely new clothes, helooked at the money lying on the table, and after a moment’s thoughtput it in his pocket. It was twenty-five roubles. He took also all thecopper change from the ten roubles spent by Razumihin on the clothes.Then he softly unlatched the door, went out, slipped downstairs andglanced in at the open kitchen door. Nastasya was standing with her backto him, blowing up the landlady’s samovar. She heard nothing. Who wouldhave dreamed of his going out, indeed? A minute later he was in thestreet.
It was nearly eight o’clock, the sun was setting. It was as stifling asbefore, but he eagerly drank in the stinking, dusty town air. His headfelt rather dizzy; a sort of savage energy gleamed suddenly in hisfeverish eyes and his wasted, pale and yellow face. He did not know anddid not think where he was going, he had one thought only: “that all_this_ must be ended to-day, once for all, immediately; that he wouldnot return home without it, because he _would not go on living likethat_.” How, with what to make an end? He had not an idea about it,he did not even want to think of it. He drove away thought; thoughttortured him. All he knew, all he felt was that everything must bechanged “one way or another,” he repeated with desperate and immovableself-confidence and determination.
From old habit he took his usual walk in the direction of the HayMarket. A dark-haired young man with a barrel organ was standing inthe road in front of a little general shop and was grinding out a verysentimental song. He was accompanying a girl of fifteen, who stoodon the pavement in front of him. She was dressed up in a crinoline, amantle and a straw hat with a flame-coloured feather in it, all veryold and shabby. In a strong and rather agreeable voice, cracked andcoarsened by street singing, she sang in hope of getting a copper fromthe shop. Raskolnikov joined two or three listeners, took out a fivecopeck piece and put it in the girl’s hand. She broke off abruptly on asentimental high note, shouted sharply to the organ grinder “Come on,”and both moved on to the next shop.
“Do you like street music?” said Raskolnikov, addressing a middle-agedman standing idly by him. The man looked at him, startled and wondering.
“I love to hear singing to a street organ,” said Raskolnikov, and hismanner seemed strangely out of keeping with the subject--“I like iton cold, dark, damp autumn evenings--they must be damp--when all thepassers-by have pale green, sickly faces, or better still when wetsnow is falling straight down, when there’s no wind--you know what Imean?--and the street lamps shine through it...”
“I don’t know.... Excuse me...” muttered the stranger, frightened by thequestion and Raskolnikov’s strange manner, and he crossed over to theother side of the street.
Raskolnikov walked straight on and came out at the corner of the HayMarket, where the huckster and his wife had talked with Lizaveta; butthey were not there now. Recognising the place, he stopped, looked roundand addressed a young fellow in a red shirt who stood gaping before acorn chandler’s shop.
“Isn’t there a man who keeps a booth with his wife at this corner?”
“All sorts of people keep booths here,” answered the young man, glancingsuperciliously at Raskolnikov.
“What’s his name?”
“What he was christened.”
“Aren’t you a Zaraïsky man, too? Which province?”
The young man looked at Raskolnikov again.
“It’s not a province, your excellency, but a district. Graciouslyforgive me, your excellency!”
“Is that a tavern at the top there?”
“Yes, it’s an eating-house and there’s a billiard-room and you’ll findprincesses there too.... La-la!”
Raskolnikov crossed the square. In that corner there was a dense crowdof peasants. He pushed his way into the thickest part of it, lookingat the faces. He felt an unaccountable inclination to enter intoconversation with people. But the peasants took no notice of him; theywere all shouting in groups together. He stood and thought a little andtook a turning to the right in the direction of V.
He had often crossed that little street which turns at an angle, leadingfrom the market-place to Sadovy Street. Of late he had often felt drawnto wander about this district, when he felt depressed, that he mightfeel more so.
Now he walked along, thinking of nothing. At that point there is a greatblock of buildings, entirely let out in dram shops and eating-houses;women were continually running in and out, bare-headed and in theirindoor clothes. Here and there they gathered in groups, on the pavement,especially about the entrances to various festive establishments inthe lower storeys. From one of these a loud din, sounds of singing, thetinkling of a guitar and shouts of merriment, floated into the street.A crowd of women were thronging round the door; some were sitting on thesteps, others on the pavement, others were standing talking. A drunkensoldier, smoking a cigarette, was walking near them in the road,swearing; he seemed to be trying to find his way somewhere, but hadforgotten where. One beggar was quarrelling with another, and a man deaddrunk was lying right across the road. Raskolnikov joined the throng ofwomen, who were talking in husky voices. They were bare-headed and worecotton dresses and goatskin shoes. There were women of forty and somenot more than seventeen; almost all had blackened eyes.
He felt strangely attracted by the singing and all the noise anduproar in the saloon below.... someone could be heard within dancingfrantically, marking time with his heels to the sounds of the guitarand of a thin falsetto voice singing a jaunty air. He listened intently,gloomily and dreamily, bending down at the entrance and peepinginquisitively in from the pavement.
“Oh, my handsome soldierDon’t beat me for nothing,”
trilled the thin voice of the singer. Raskolnikov felt a great desire tomake out what he was singing, as though everything depended on that.
“Shall I go in?” he thought. “They are laughing. From drink. Shall I getdrunk?”
“Won’t you come in?” one of the women asked him. Her voice wasstill musical and less thick than the others, she was young and notrepulsive--the only one of the group.
“Why, she’s pretty,” he said, drawing himself up and looking at her.
She smiled, much pleased at the compliment.
“You’re very nice looking yourself,” she said.
“Isn’t he thin though!” observed another woman in a deep bass. “Have youjust come out of a hospital?”
“They’re all generals’ daughters, it seems, but they have all snubnoses,” interposed a tipsy peasant with a sly smile on his face, wearinga loose coat. “See how jolly they are.”
“Go along with you!”
“I’ll go, sweetie!”
And he darted down into the saloon below. Raskolnikov moved on.
“I say, sir,” the girl shouted after him.
“What is it?”
She hesitated.
“I’ll always be pleased to spend an hour with you, kind gentleman, butnow I feel shy. Give me six copecks for a drink, there’s a nice youngman!”
Raskolnikov gave her what came first--fifteen copecks.
“Ah, what a good-natured gentleman!”
“What’s your name?”
“Ask for Duclida.”
“Well, that’s too much,” one of the women observed, shaking her headat Duclida. “I don’t know how you can ask like that. I believe I shoulddrop with shame....”
Raskolnikov looked curiously at the speaker. She was a pock-marked wenchof thirty, covered with bruises, with her upper lip swollen. She madeher criticism quietly and earnestly. “Where is it,” thought Raskolnikov.“Where is it I’ve read that someone condemned to death says or thinks,an hour before his death, that if he had to live on some high rock,on such a narrow ledge that he’d only room to stand, and the ocean,everlasting darkness, everlasting solitude, everlasting tempest aroundhim, if he had to remain standing on a square yard of space all hislife, a thousand years, eternity, it were better to live so than to dieat once! Only to live, to live and live! Life, whatever it may be!...How true it is! Good God, how true! Man is a vile creature!... And vileis he who calls him vile for that,” he added a moment later.
He went into another street. “Bah, the Palais de Cristal! Razumihinwas just talking of the Palais de Cristal. But what on earth was itI wanted? Yes, the newspapers.... Zossimov said he’d read it in thepapers. Have you the papers?” he asked, going into a very spacious andpositively clean restaurant, consisting of several rooms, which were,however, rather empty. Two or three people were drinking tea, and in aroom further away were sitting four men drinking champagne. Raskolnikovfancied that Zametov was one of them, but he could not be sure at thatdistance. “What if it is?” he thought.
“Will you have vodka?” asked the waiter.
“Give me some tea and bring me the papers, the old ones for the lastfive days, and I’ll give you something.”
“Yes, sir, here’s to-day’s. No vodka?”
The old newspapers and the tea were brought. Raskolnikov sat down andbegan to look through them.
“Oh, damn... these are the items of intelligence. An accident on astaircase, spontaneous combustion of a shopkeeper from alcohol, a firein Peski... a fire in the Petersburg quarter... another fire in thePetersburg quarter... and another fire in the Petersburg quarter....Ah, here it is!” He found at last what he was seeking and began toread it. The lines danced before his eyes, but he read it all and beganeagerly seeking later additions in the following numbers. His handsshook with nervous impatience as he turned the sheets. Suddenly someonesat down beside him at his table. He looked up, it was the head clerkZametov, looking just the same, with the rings on his fingers and thewatch-chain, with the curly, black hair, parted and pomaded, with thesmart waistcoat, rather shabby coat and doubtful linen. He was in a goodhumour, at least he was smiling very gaily and good-humouredly. His darkface was rather flushed from the champagne he had drunk.
“What, you here?” he began in surprise, speaking as though he’d knownhim all his life. “Why, Razumihin told me only yesterday you wereunconscious. How strange! And do you know I’ve been to see you?”
Raskolnikov knew he would come up to him. He laid aside the papers andturned to Zametov. There was a smile on his lips, and a new shade ofirritable impatience was apparent in that smile.
“I know you have,” he answered. “I’ve heard it. You looked for mysock.... And you know Razumihin has lost his heart to you? He saysyou’ve been with him to Luise Ivanovna’s--you know, the woman you triedto befriend, for whom you winked to the Explosive Lieutenant and hewould not understand. Do you remember? How could he fail tounderstand--it was quite clear, wasn’t it?”
“What a hot head he is!”
“The explosive one?”
“No, your friend Razumihin.”
“You must have a jolly life, Mr. Zametov; entrance free to the mostagreeable places. Who’s been pouring champagne into you just now?”
“We’ve just been... having a drink together.... You talk about pouringit into me!”
“By way of a fee! You profit by everything!” Raskolnikov laughed, “it’sall right, my dear boy,” he added, slapping Zametov on the shoulder. “Iam not speaking from temper, but in a friendly way, for sport, as thatworkman of yours said when he was scuffling with Dmitri, in the case ofthe old woman....”
“How do you know about it?”
“Perhaps I know more about it than you do.”
“How strange you are.... I am sure you are still very unwell. Yououghtn’t to have come out.”
“Oh, do I seem strange to you?”
“Yes. What are you doing, reading the papers?”
“Yes.”
“There’s a lot about the fires.”
“No, I am not reading about the fires.” Here he looked mysteriously atZametov; his lips were twisted again in a mocking smile. “No, I am notreading about the fires,” he went on, winking at Zametov. “But confessnow, my dear fellow, you’re awfully anxious to know what I am readingabout?”
“I am not in the least. Mayn’t I ask a question? Why do you keepon...?”
“Listen, you are a man of culture and education?”
“I was in the sixth class at the gymnasium,” said Zametov with somedignity.
“Sixth class! Ah, my cock-sparrow! With your parting and your rings--youare a gentleman of fortune. Foo! what a charming boy!” Here Raskolnikovbroke into a nervous laugh right in Zametov’s face. The latter drewback, more amazed than offended.
“Foo! how strange you are!” Zametov repeated very seriously. “I can’thelp thinking you are still delirious.”
“I am delirious? You are fibbing, my cock-sparrow! So I am strange? Youfind me curious, do you?”
“Yes, curious.”
“Shall I tell you what I was reading about, what I was looking for? Seewhat a lot of papers I’ve made them bring me. Suspicious, eh?”
“Well, what is it?”
“You prick up your ears?”
“How do you mean--‘prick up my ears’?”
“I’ll explain that afterwards, but now, my boy, I declare to you... no,better ‘I confess’... No, that’s not right either; ‘I make a depositionand you take it.’ I depose that I was reading, that I was looking andsearching....” he screwed up his eyes and paused. “I was searching--andcame here on purpose to do it--for news of the murder of the oldpawnbroker woman,” he articulated at last, almost in a whisper, bringinghis face exceedingly close to the face of Zametov. Zametov looked at himsteadily, without moving or drawing his face away. What struck Zametovafterwards as the strangest part of it all was that silence followed forexactly a minute, and that they gazed at one another all the while.
“What if you have been reading about it?” he cried at last, perplexedand impatient. “That’s no business of mine! What of it?”
“The same old woman,” Raskolnikov went on in the same whisper, notheeding Zametov’s explanation, “about whom you were talking in thepolice-office, you remember, when I fainted. Well, do you understandnow?”
“What do you mean? Understand... what?” Zametov brought out, almostalarmed.
Raskolnikov’s set and earnest face was suddenly transformed, and hesuddenly went off into the same nervous laugh as before, as thoughutterly unable to restrain himself. And in one flash he recalled withextraordinary vividness of sensation a moment in the recent past, thatmoment when he stood with the axe behind the door, while the latchtrembled and the men outside swore and shook it, and he had a suddendesire to shout at them, to swear at them, to put out his tongue atthem, to mock them, to laugh, and laugh, and laugh!
“You are either mad, or...” began Zametov, and he broke off, as thoughstunned by the idea that had suddenly flashed into his mind.
“Or? Or what? What? Come, tell me!”
“Nothing,” said Zametov, getting angry, “it’s all nonsense!”
Both were silent. After his sudden fit of laughter Raskolnikov becamesuddenly thoughtful and melancholy. He put his elbow on the table andleaned his head on his hand. He seemed to have completely forgottenZametov. The silence lasted for some time.
“Why don’t you drink your tea? It’s getting cold,” said Zametov.
“What! Tea? Oh, yes....” Raskolnikov sipped the glass, put a morsel ofbread in his mouth and, suddenly looking at Zametov, seemed to remembereverything and pulled himself together. At the same moment his faceresumed its original mocking expression. He went on drinking tea.
“There have been a great many of these crimes lately,” said Zametov.“Only the other day I read in the _Moscow News_ that a whole gang offalse coiners had been caught in Moscow. It was a regular society. Theyused to forge tickets!”
“Oh, but it was a long time ago! I read about it a month ago,”Raskolnikov answered calmly. “So you consider them criminals?” he added,smiling.
“Of course they are criminals.”
“They? They are children, simpletons, not criminals! Why, half a hundredpeople meeting for such an object--what an idea! Three would be toomany, and then they want to have more faith in one another than inthemselves! One has only to blab in his cups and it all collapses.Simpletons! They engaged untrustworthy people to change the notes--whata thing to trust to a casual stranger! Well, let us suppose that thesesimpletons succeed and each makes a million, and what follows for therest of their lives? Each is dependent on the others for the rest of hislife! Better hang oneself at once! And they did not know how to changethe notes either; the man who changed the notes took five thousandroubles, and his hands trembled. He counted the first four thousand,but did not count the fifth thousand--he was in such a hurry to get themoney into his pocket and run away. Of course he roused suspicion. Andthe whole thing came to a crash through one fool! Is it possible?”
“That his hands trembled?” observed Zametov, “yes, that’s quitepossible. That, I feel quite sure, is possible. Sometimes one can’tstand things.”
“Can’t stand that?”
“Why, could you stand it then? No, I couldn’t. For the sake of a hundredroubles to face such a terrible experience? To go with false notesinto a bank where it’s their business to spot that sort of thing! No, Ishould not have the face to do it. Would you?”
Raskolnikov had an intense desire again “to put his tongue out.” Shiverskept running down his spine.
“I should do it quite differently,” Raskolnikov began. “This is how Iwould change the notes: I’d count the first thousand three or four timesbackwards and forwards, looking at every note and then I’d set to thesecond thousand; I’d count that half-way through and then hold somefifty-rouble note to the light, then turn it, then hold it to the lightagain--to see whether it was a good one. ‘I am afraid,’ I would say, ‘arelation of mine lost twenty-five roubles the other day through afalse note,’ and then I’d tell them the whole story. And after I begancounting the third, ‘No, excuse me,’ I would say, ‘I fancy I made amistake in the seventh hundred in that second thousand, I am not sure.’And so I would give up the third thousand and go back to the second andso on to the end. And when I had finished, I’d pick out one from thefifth and one from the second thousand and take them again to the lightand ask again, ‘Change them, please,’ and put the clerk into such a stewthat he would not know how to get rid of me. When I’d finished and hadgone out, I’d come back, ‘No, excuse me,’ and ask for some explanation.That’s how I’d do it.”
“Foo! what terrible things you say!” said Zametov, laughing. “But allthat is only talk. I dare say when it came to deeds you’d make a slip.I believe that even a practised, desperate man cannot always reckon onhimself, much less you and I. To take an example near home--that oldwoman murdered in our district. The murderer seems to have been adesperate fellow, he risked everything in open daylight, was saved bya miracle--but his hands shook, too. He did not succeed in robbing theplace, he couldn’t stand it. That was clear from the...”
Raskolnikov seemed offended.
“Clear? Why don’t you catch him then?” he cried, maliciously gibing atZametov.
“Well, they will catch him.”
“Who? You? Do you suppose you could catch him? You’ve a tough job! Agreat point for you is whether a man is spending money or not. If he hadno money and suddenly begins spending, he must be the man. So that anychild can mislead you.”
“The fact is they always do that, though,” answered Zametov. “A man willcommit a clever murder at the risk of his life and then at once he goesdrinking in a tavern. They are caught spending money, they are not allas cunning as you are. You wouldn’t go to a tavern, of course?”
Raskolnikov frowned and looked steadily at Zametov.
“You seem to enjoy the subject and would like to know how I shouldbehave in that case, too?” he asked with displeasure.
“I should like to,” Zametov answered firmly and seriously. Somewhat toomuch earnestness began to appear in his words and looks.
“Very much?”
“Very much!”
“All right then. This is how I should behave,” Raskolnikov began, againbringing his face close to Zametov’s, again staring at him and speakingin a whisper, so that the latter positively shuddered. “This is whatI should have done. I should have taken the money and jewels, I shouldhave walked out of there and have gone straight to some deserted placewith fences round it and scarcely anyone to be seen, some kitchen gardenor place of that sort. I should have looked out beforehand some stoneweighing a hundredweight or more which had been lying in the corner fromthe time the house was built. I would lift that stone--there would sureto be a hollow under it, and I would put the jewels and money in thathole. Then I’d roll the stone back so that it would look as before,would press it down with my foot and walk away. And for a year or two,three maybe, I would not touch it. And, well, they could search! There’dbe no trace.”
“You are a madman,” said Zametov, and for some reason he too spoke in awhisper, and moved away from Raskolnikov, whose eyes were glittering. Hehad turned fearfully pale and his upper lip was twitching and quivering.He bent down as close as possible to Zametov, and his lips began to movewithout uttering a word. This lasted for half a minute; he knew what hewas doing, but could not restrain himself. The terrible word trembled onhis lips, like the latch on that door; in another moment it will breakout, in another moment he will let it go, he will speak out.
“And what if it was I who murdered the old woman and Lizaveta?” he saidsuddenly and--realised what he had done.
Zametov looked wildly at him and turned white as the tablecloth. Hisface wore a contorted smile.
“But is it possible?” he brought out faintly. Raskolnikov lookedwrathfully at him.
“Own up that you believed it, yes, you did?”
“Not a bit of it, I believe it less than ever now,” Zametov criedhastily.
“I’ve caught my cock-sparrow! So you did believe it before, if now youbelieve less than ever?”
“Not at all,” cried Zametov, obviously embarrassed. “Have you beenfrightening me so as to lead up to this?”
“You don’t believe it then? What were you talking about behind myback when I went out of the police-office? And why did the explosivelieutenant question me after I fainted? Hey, there,” he shouted to thewaiter, getting up and taking his cap, “how much?”
“Thirty copecks,” the latter replied, running up.
“And there is twenty copecks for vodka. See what a lot of money!” heheld out his shaking hand to Zametov with notes in it. “Red notes andblue, twenty-five roubles. Where did I get them? And where did my newclothes come from? You know I had not a copeck. You’ve cross-examined mylandlady, I’ll be bound.... Well, that’s enough! _Assez causé!_ Till wemeet again!”
He went out, trembling all over from a sort of wild hystericalsensation, in which there was an element of insufferable rapture. Yet hewas gloomy and terribly tired. His face was twisted as after a fit.His fatigue increased rapidly. Any shock, any irritating sensationstimulated and revived his energies at once, but his strength failed asquickly when the stimulus was removed.
Zametov, left alone, sat for a long time in the same place, plunged inthought. Raskolnikov had unwittingly worked a revolution in his brain ona certain point and had made up his mind for him conclusively.
“Ilya Petrovitch is a blockhead,” he decided.
Raskolnikov had hardly opened the door of the restaurant when hestumbled against Razumihin on the steps. They did not see each othertill they almost knocked against each other. For a moment they stoodlooking each other up and down. Razumihin was greatly astounded, thenanger, real anger gleamed fiercely in his eyes.
“So here you are!” he shouted at the top of his voice--“you ran awayfrom your bed! And here I’ve been looking for you under the sofa! Wewent up to the garret. I almost beat Nastasya on your account. And herehe is after all. Rodya! What is the meaning of it? Tell me the wholetruth! Confess! Do you hear?”
“It means that I’m sick to death of you all and I want to be alone,”Raskolnikov answered calmly.
“Alone? When you are not able to walk, when your face is as white as asheet and you are gasping for breath! Idiot!... What have you been doingin the Palais de Cristal? Own up at once!”
“Let me go!” said Raskolnikov and tried to pass him. This was too muchfor Razumihin; he gripped him firmly by the shoulder.
“Let you go? You dare tell me to let you go? Do you know what I’ll dowith you directly? I’ll pick you up, tie you up in a bundle, carry youhome under my arm and lock you up!”
“Listen, Razumihin,” Raskolnikov began quietly, apparently calm--“can’tyou see that I don’t want your benevolence? A strange desire you have toshower benefits on a man who... curses them, who feels them a burden infact! Why did you seek me out at the beginning of my illness? Maybe Iwas very glad to die. Didn’t I tell you plainly enough to-day thatyou were torturing me, that I was... sick of you! You seem to want totorture people! I assure you that all that is seriously hindering myrecovery, because it’s continually irritating me. You saw Zossimovwent away just now to avoid irritating me. You leave me alone too, forgoodness’ sake! What right have you, indeed, to keep me by force? Don’tyou see that I am in possession of all my faculties now? How, how canI persuade you not to persecute me with your kindness? I may beungrateful, I may be mean, only let me be, for God’s sake, let me be!Let me be, let me be!”
He began calmly, gloating beforehand over the venomous phrases he wasabout to utter, but finished, panting for breath, in a frenzy, as he hadbeen with Luzhin.
Razumihin stood a moment, thought and let his hand drop.
“Well, go to hell then,” he said gently and thoughtfully. “Stay,” heroared, as Raskolnikov was about to move. “Listen to me. Let me tellyou, that you are all a set of babbling, posing idiots! If you’ve anylittle trouble you brood over it like a hen over an egg. And you areplagiarists even in that! There isn’t a sign of independent life inyou! You are made of spermaceti ointment and you’ve lymph in your veinsinstead of blood. I don’t believe in anyone of you! In any circumstancesthe first thing for all of you is to be unlike a human being! Stop!” hecried with redoubled fury, noticing that Raskolnikov was again makinga movement--“hear me out! You know I’m having a house-warming thisevening, I dare say they’ve arrived by now, but I left my uncle there--Ijust ran in--to receive the guests. And if you weren’t a fool, a commonfool, a perfect fool, if you were an original instead of a translation...you see, Rodya, I recognise you’re a clever fellow, but you’re afool!--and if you weren’t a fool you’d come round to me this eveninginstead of wearing out your boots in the street! Since you have goneout, there’s no help for it! I’d give you a snug easy chair, my landladyhas one... a cup of tea, company.... Or you could lie on the sofa--anyway you would be with us.... Zossimov will be there too. Will you come?”
“No.”
“R-rubbish!” Razumihin shouted, out of patience. “How do you know?You can’t answer for yourself! You don’t know anything about it....Thousands of times I’ve fought tooth and nail with people and run backto them afterwards.... One feels ashamed and goes back to a man! Soremember, Potchinkov’s house on the third storey....”
“Why, Mr. Razumihin, I do believe you’d let anybody beat you from sheerbenevolence.”
“Beat? Whom? Me? I’d twist his nose off at the mere idea! Potchinkov’shouse, 47, Babushkin’s flat....”
“I shall not come, Razumihin.” Raskolnikov turned and walked away.
“I bet you will,” Razumihin shouted after him. “I refuse to know you ifyou don’t! Stay, hey, is Zametov in there?”
“Yes.”
“Did you see him?”
“Yes.”
“Talked to him?”
“Yes.”
“What about? Confound you, don’t tell me then. Potchinkov’s house, 47,Babushkin’s flat, remember!”
Raskolnikov walked on and turned the corner into Sadovy Street.Razumihin looked after him thoughtfully. Then with a wave of his hand hewent into the house but stopped short of the stairs.
“Confound it,” he went on almost aloud. “He talked sensibly but yet...I am a fool! As if madmen didn’t talk sensibly! And this was just whatZossimov seemed afraid of.” He struck his finger on his forehead. “Whatif... how could I let him go off alone? He may drown himself.... Ach,what a blunder! I can’t.” And he ran back to overtake Raskolnikov, butthere was no trace of him. With a curse he returned with rapid steps tothe Palais de Cristal to question Zametov.
Raskolnikov walked straight to X---- Bridge, stood in the middle, andleaning both elbows on the rail stared into the distance. On partingwith Razumihin, he felt so much weaker that he could scarcely reach thisplace. He longed to sit or lie down somewhere in the street. Bendingover the water, he gazed mechanically at the last pink flush of thesunset, at the row of houses growing dark in the gathering twilight, atone distant attic window on the left bank, flashing as though on fire inthe last rays of the setting sun, at the darkening water of the canal,and the water seemed to catch his attention. At last red circles flashedbefore his eyes, the houses seemed moving, the passers-by, the canalbanks, the carriages, all danced before his eyes. Suddenly he started,saved again perhaps from swooning by an uncanny and hideous sight. Hebecame aware of someone standing on the right side of him; he lookedand saw a tall woman with a kerchief on her head, with a long, yellow,wasted face and red sunken eyes. She was looking straight at him, butobviously she saw nothing and recognised no one. Suddenly she leaned herright hand on the parapet, lifted her right leg over the railing, thenher left and threw herself into the canal. The filthy water parted andswallowed up its victim for a moment, but an instant later the drowningwoman floated to the surface, moving slowly with the current, her headand legs in the water, her skirt inflated like a balloon over her back.
“A woman drowning! A woman drowning!” shouted dozens of voices; peopleran up, both banks were thronged with spectators, on the bridge peoplecrowded about Raskolnikov, pressing up behind him.
“Mercy on it! it’s our Afrosinya!” a woman cried tearfully close by.“Mercy! save her! kind people, pull her out!”
“A boat, a boat” was shouted in the crowd. But there was no need of aboat; a policeman ran down the steps to the canal, threw off his greatcoat and his boots and rushed into the water. It was easy to reach her:she floated within a couple of yards from the steps, he caught hold ofher clothes with his right hand and with his left seized a pole which acomrade held out to him; the drowning woman was pulled out at once. Theylaid her on the granite pavement of the embankment. She soon recoveredconsciousness, raised her head, sat up and began sneezing and coughing,stupidly wiping her wet dress with her hands. She said nothing.
“She’s drunk herself out of her senses,” the same woman’s voice wailedat her side. “Out of her senses. The other day she tried to hangherself, we cut her down. I ran out to the shop just now, left my littlegirl to look after her--and here she’s in trouble again! A neighbour,gentleman, a neighbour, we live close by, the second house from the end,see yonder....”
The crowd broke up. The police still remained round the woman, someonementioned the police station.... Raskolnikov looked on with a strangesensation of indifference and apathy. He felt disgusted. “No, that’sloathsome... water... it’s not good enough,” he muttered to himself.“Nothing will come of it,” he added, “no use to wait. What about thepolice office...? And why isn’t Zametov at the police office? The policeoffice is open till ten o’clock....” He turned his back to the railingand looked about him.
“Very well then!” he said resolutely; he moved from the bridge andwalked in the direction of the police office. His heart felt hollow andempty. He did not want to think. Even his depression had passed, therewas not a trace now of the energy with which he had set out “to make anend of it all.” Complete apathy had succeeded to it.
“Well, it’s a way out of it,” he thought, walking slowly and listlesslyalong the canal bank. “Anyway I’ll make an end, for I want to.... Butis it a way out? What does it matter! There’ll be the square yard ofspace--ha! But what an end! Is it really the end? Shall I tell them ornot? Ah... damn! How tired I am! If I could find somewhere to sit or liedown soon! What I am most ashamed of is its being so stupid. But I don’tcare about that either! What idiotic ideas come into one’s head.”
To reach the police office he had to go straight forward and take thesecond turning to the left. It was only a few paces away. But at thefirst turning he stopped and, after a minute’s thought, turned into aside street and went two streets out of his way, possibly without anyobject, or possibly to delay a minute and gain time. He walked, lookingat the ground; suddenly someone seemed to whisper in his ear; he liftedhis head and saw that he was standing at the very gate of _the_ house.He had not passed it, he had not been near it since _that_ evening.An overwhelming, unaccountable prompting drew him on. He went into thehouse, passed through the gateway, then into the first entrance on theright, and began mounting the familiar staircase to the fourth storey.The narrow, steep staircase was very dark. He stopped at each landingand looked round him with curiosity; on the first landing the frameworkof the window had been taken out. “That wasn’t so then,” he thought.Here was the flat on the second storey where Nikolay and Dmitri had beenworking. “It’s shut up and the door newly painted. So it’s to let.” Thenthe third storey and the fourth. “Here!” He was perplexed to find thedoor of the flat wide open. There were men there, he could hear voices;he had not expected that. After brief hesitation he mounted the laststairs and went into the flat. It, too, was being done up; there wereworkmen in it. This seemed to amaze him; he somehow fancied that hewould find everything as he left it, even perhaps the corpses in thesame places on the floor. And now, bare walls, no furniture; it seemedstrange. He walked to the window and sat down on the window-sill. Therewere two workmen, both young fellows, but one much younger than theother. They were papering the walls with a new white paper covered withlilac flowers, instead of the old, dirty, yellow one. Raskolnikov forsome reason felt horribly annoyed by this. He looked at the new paperwith dislike, as though he felt sorry to have it all so changed.The workmen had obviously stayed beyond their time and now they werehurriedly rolling up their paper and getting ready to go home. They tookno notice of Raskolnikov’s coming in; they were talking. Raskolnikovfolded his arms and listened.
“She comes to me in the morning,” said the elder to the younger, “veryearly, all dressed up. ‘Why are you preening and prinking?’ says I. ‘Iam ready to do anything to please you, Tit Vassilitch!’ That’s a way ofgoing on! And she dressed up like a regular fashion book!”
“And what is a fashion book?” the younger one asked. He obviouslyregarded the other as an authority.
“A fashion book is a lot of pictures, coloured, and they come to thetailors here every Saturday, by post from abroad, to show folks howto dress, the male sex as well as the female. They’re pictures. Thegentlemen are generally wearing fur coats and for the ladies’ fluffles,they’re beyond anything you can fancy.”
“There’s nothing you can’t find in Petersburg,” the younger criedenthusiastically, “except father and mother, there’s everything!”
“Except them, there’s everything to be found, my boy,” the elderdeclared sententiously.
Raskolnikov got up and walked into the other room where the strong box,the bed, and the chest of drawers had been; the room seemed to him verytiny without furniture in it. The paper was the same; the paper in thecorner showed where the case of ikons had stood. He looked at it andwent to the window. The elder workman looked at him askance.
“What do you want?” he asked suddenly.
Instead of answering Raskolnikov went into the passage and pulled thebell. The same bell, the same cracked note. He rang it a second anda third time; he listened and remembered. The hideous and agonisinglyfearful sensation he had felt then began to come back more and morevividly. He shuddered at every ring and it gave him more and moresatisfaction.
“Well, what do you want? Who are you?” the workman shouted, going out tohim. Raskolnikov went inside again.
“I want to take a flat,” he said. “I am looking round.”
“It’s not the time to look at rooms at night! and you ought to come upwith the porter.”
“The floors have been washed, will they be painted?” Raskolnikov wenton. “Is there no blood?”
“What blood?”
“Why, the old woman and her sister were murdered here. There was aperfect pool there.”
“But who are you?” the workman cried, uneasy.
“Who am I?”
“Yes.”
“You want to know? Come to the police station, I’ll tell you.”
The workmen looked at him in amazement.
“It’s time for us to go, we are late. Come along, Alyoshka. We must lockup,” said the elder workman.
“Very well, come along,” said Raskolnikov indifferently, and goingout first, he went slowly downstairs. “Hey, porter,” he cried in thegateway.
At the entrance several people were standing, staring at the passers-by;the two porters, a peasant woman, a man in a long coat and a few others.Raskolnikov went straight up to them.
“What do you want?” asked one of the porters.
“Have you been to the police office?”
“I’ve just been there. What do you want?”
“Is it open?”
“Of course.”
“Is the assistant there?”
“He was there for a time. What do you want?”
Raskolnikov made no reply, but stood beside them lost in thought.
“He’s been to look at the flat,” said the elder workman, coming forward.
“Which flat?”
“Where we are at work. ‘Why have you washed away the blood?’ says he.‘There has been a murder here,’ says he, ‘and I’ve come to take it.’And he began ringing at the bell, all but broke it. ‘Come to the policestation,’ says he. ‘I’ll tell you everything there.’ He wouldn’t leaveus.”
The porter looked at Raskolnikov, frowning and perplexed.
“Who are you?” he shouted as impressively as he could.
“I am Rodion Romanovitch Raskolnikov, formerly a student, I live inShil’s house, not far from here, flat Number 14, ask the porter, heknows me.” Raskolnikov said all this in a lazy, dreamy voice, notturning round, but looking intently into the darkening street.
“Why have you been to the flat?”
“To look at it.”
“What is there to look at?”
“Take him straight to the police station,” the man in the long coatjerked in abruptly.
Raskolnikov looked intently at him over his shoulder and said in thesame slow, lazy tones:
“Come along.”
“Yes, take him,” the man went on more confidently. “Why was he goinginto _that_, what’s in his mind, eh?”
“He’s not drunk, but God knows what’s the matter with him,” muttered theworkman.
“But what do you want?” the porter shouted again, beginning to get angryin earnest--“Why are you hanging about?”
“You funk the police station then?” said Raskolnikov jeeringly.
“How funk it? Why are you hanging about?”
“He’s a rogue!” shouted the peasant woman.
“Why waste time talking to him?” cried the other porter, a huge peasantin a full open coat and with keys on his belt. “Get along! He is a rogueand no mistake. Get along!”
And seizing Raskolnikov by the shoulder he flung him into the street. Helurched forward, but recovered his footing, looked at the spectators insilence and walked away.
“Strange man!” observed the workman.
“There are strange folks about nowadays,” said the woman.
“You should have taken him to the police station all the same,” said theman in the long coat.
“Better have nothing to do with him,” decided the big porter. “A regularrogue! Just what he wants, you may be sure, but once take him up, youwon’t get rid of him.... We know the sort!”
“Shall I go there or not?” thought Raskolnikov, standing in the middleof the thoroughfare at the cross-roads, and he looked about him, asthough expecting from someone a decisive word. But no sound came, allwas dead and silent like the stones on which he walked, dead to him, tohim alone.... All at once at the end of the street, two hundred yardsaway, in the gathering dusk he saw a crowd and heard talk and shouts.In the middle of the crowd stood a carriage.... A light gleamed in themiddle of the street. “What is it?” Raskolnikov turned to the rightand went up to the crowd. He seemed to clutch at everything and smiledcoldly when he recognised it, for he had fully made up his mind to go tothe police station and knew that it would all soon be over.
CHAPTER VII
An elegant carriage stood in the middle of the road with a pair ofspirited grey horses; there was no one in it, and the coachman had gotoff his box and stood by; the horses were being held by the bridle....A mass of people had gathered round, the police standing in front. Oneof them held a lighted lantern which he was turning on something lyingclose to the wheels. Everyone was talking, shouting, exclaiming; thecoachman seemed at a loss and kept repeating:
“What a misfortune! Good Lord, what a misfortune!”
Raskolnikov pushed his way in as far as he could, and succeeded at lastin seeing the object of the commotion and interest. On the ground aman who had been run over lay apparently unconscious, and covered withblood; he was very badly dressed, but not like a workman. Blood wasflowing from his head and face; his face was crushed, mutilated anddisfigured. He was evidently badly injured.
“Merciful heaven!” wailed the coachman, “what more could I do? If I’dbeen driving fast or had not shouted to him, but I was going quietly,not in a hurry. Everyone could see I was going along just like everybodyelse. A drunken man can’t walk straight, we all know.... I saw himcrossing the street, staggering and almost falling. I shouted againand a second and a third time, then I held the horses in, but he fellstraight under their feet! Either he did it on purpose or he was verytipsy.... The horses are young and ready to take fright... they started,he screamed... that made them worse. That’s how it happened!”
“That’s just how it was,” a voice in the crowd confirmed.
“He shouted, that’s true, he shouted three times,” another voicedeclared.
“Three times it was, we all heard it,” shouted a third.
But the coachman was not very much distressed and frightened. It wasevident that the carriage belonged to a rich and important person whowas awaiting it somewhere; the police, of course, were in no littleanxiety to avoid upsetting his arrangements. All they had to do was totake the injured man to the police station and the hospital. No one knewhis name.
Meanwhile Raskolnikov had squeezed in and stooped closer over him. Thelantern suddenly lighted up the unfortunate man’s face. He recognisedhim.
“I know him! I know him!” he shouted, pushing to the front. “It’s agovernment clerk retired from the service, Marmeladov. He lives closeby in Kozel’s house.... Make haste for a doctor! I will pay, see?” Hepulled money out of his pocket and showed it to the policeman. He was inviolent agitation.
The police were glad that they had found out who the man was.Raskolnikov gave his own name and address, and, as earnestly as if ithad been his father, he besought the police to carry the unconsciousMarmeladov to his lodging at once.
“Just here, three houses away,” he said eagerly, “the house belongs toKozel, a rich German. He was going home, no doubt drunk. I know him,he is a drunkard. He has a family there, a wife, children, he has onedaughter.... It will take time to take him to the hospital, and there issure to be a doctor in the house. I’ll pay, I’ll pay! At least he willbe looked after at home... they will help him at once. But he’ll diebefore you get him to the hospital.” He managed to slip somethingunseen into the policeman’s hand. But the thing was straightforwardand legitimate, and in any case help was closer here. They raised theinjured man; people volunteered to help.
Kozel’s house was thirty yards away. Raskolnikov walked behind,carefully holding Marmeladov’s head and showing the way.
“This way, this way! We must take him upstairs head foremost. Turnround! I’ll pay, I’ll make it worth your while,” he muttered.
Katerina Ivanovna had just begun, as she always did at every freemoment, walking to and fro in her little room from window to stove andback again, with her arms folded across her chest, talking to herselfand coughing. Of late she had begun to talk more than ever to her eldestgirl, Polenka, a child of ten, who, though there was much she did notunderstand, understood very well that her mother needed her, and soalways watched her with her big clever eyes and strove her utmostto appear to understand. This time Polenka was undressing her littlebrother, who had been unwell all day and was going to bed. The boy waswaiting for her to take off his shirt, which had to be washed at night.He was sitting straight and motionless on a chair, with a silent,serious face, with his legs stretched out straight before him--heelstogether and toes turned out.
He was listening to what his mother was saying to his sister, sittingperfectly still with pouting lips and wide-open eyes, just as all goodlittle boys have to sit when they are undressed to go to bed. A littlegirl, still younger, dressed literally in rags, stood at the screen,waiting for her turn. The door on to the stairs was open to relievethem a little from the clouds of tobacco smoke which floated in from theother rooms and brought on long terrible fits of coughing in the poor,consumptive woman. Katerina Ivanovna seemed to have grown even thinnerduring that week and the hectic flush on her face was brighter thanever.
“You wouldn’t believe, you can’t imagine, Polenka,” she said, walkingabout the room, “what a happy luxurious life we had in my papa’s houseand how this drunkard has brought me, and will bring you all, to ruin!Papa was a civil colonel and only a step from being a governor; so thateveryone who came to see him said, ‘We look upon you, Ivan Mihailovitch,as our governor!’ When I... when...” she coughed violently, “oh, cursedlife,” she cried, clearing her throat and pressing her hands to herbreast, “when I... when at the last ball... at the marshal’s...Princess Bezzemelny saw me--who gave me the blessing when your fatherand I were married, Polenka--she asked at once ‘Isn’t that the prettygirl who danced the shawl dance at the breaking-up?’ (You must mendthat tear, you must take your needle and darn it as I showed you, orto-morrow--cough, cough, cough--he will make the hole bigger,” shearticulated with effort.) “Prince Schegolskoy, a kammerjunker, had justcome from Petersburg then... he danced the mazurka with me and wanted tomake me an offer next day; but I thanked him in flattering expressionsand told him that my heart had long been another’s. That other was yourfather, Polya; papa was fearfully angry.... Is the water ready? Give methe shirt, and the stockings! Lida,” said she to the youngest one, “youmust manage without your chemise to-night... and lay your stockings outwith it... I’ll wash them together.... How is it that drunken vagabonddoesn’t come in? He has worn his shirt till it looks like a dish-clout,he has torn it to rags! I’d do it all together, so as not to have towork two nights running! Oh, dear! (Cough, cough, cough, cough!) Again!What’s this?” she cried, noticing a crowd in the passage and the men,who were pushing into her room, carrying a burden. “What is it? What arethey bringing? Mercy on us!”
“Where are we to put him?” asked the policeman, looking round whenMarmeladov, unconscious and covered with blood, had been carried in.
“On the sofa! Put him straight on the sofa, with his head this way,”Raskolnikov showed him.
“Run over in the road! Drunk!” someone shouted in the passage.
Katerina Ivanovna stood, turning white and gasping for breath. Thechildren were terrified. Little Lida screamed, rushed to Polenka andclutched at her, trembling all over.
Having laid Marmeladov down, Raskolnikov flew to Katerina Ivanovna.
“For God’s sake be calm, don’t be frightened!” he said, speakingquickly, “he was crossing the road and was run over by a carriage, don’tbe frightened, he will come to, I told them bring him here... I’ve beenhere already, you remember? He will come to; I’ll pay!”
“He’s done it this time!” Katerina Ivanovna cried despairingly and sherushed to her husband.
Raskolnikov noticed at once that she was not one of those women whoswoon easily. She instantly placed under the luckless man’s head apillow, which no one had thought of and began undressing and examininghim. She kept her head, forgetting herself, biting her trembling lipsand stifling the screams which were ready to break from her.
Raskolnikov meanwhile induced someone to run for a doctor. There was adoctor, it appeared, next door but one.
“I’ve sent for a doctor,” he kept assuring Katerina Ivanovna, “don’t beuneasy, I’ll pay. Haven’t you water?... and give me a napkin or a towel,anything, as quick as you can.... He is injured, but not killed, believeme.... We shall see what the doctor says!”
Katerina Ivanovna ran to the window; there, on a broken chair in thecorner, a large earthenware basin full of water had been stood, inreadiness for washing her children’s and husband’s linen that night.This washing was done by Katerina Ivanovna at night at least twice aweek, if not oftener. For the family had come to such a pass that theywere practically without change of linen, and Katerina Ivanovna couldnot endure uncleanliness and, rather than see dirt in the house, shepreferred to wear herself out at night, working beyond her strength whenthe rest were asleep, so as to get the wet linen hung on a line and dryby the morning. She took up the basin of water at Raskolnikov’s request,but almost fell down with her burden. But the latter had alreadysucceeded in finding a towel, wetted it and began washing the blood offMarmeladov’s face.
Katerina Ivanovna stood by, breathing painfully and pressing her handsto her breast. She was in need of attention herself. Raskolnikov beganto realise that he might have made a mistake in having the injured manbrought here. The policeman, too, stood in hesitation.
“Polenka,” cried Katerina Ivanovna, “run to Sonia, make haste. If youdon’t find her at home, leave word that her father has been run overand that she is to come here at once... when she comes in. Run, Polenka!there, put on the shawl.”
“Run your fastest!” cried the little boy on the chair suddenly, afterwhich he relapsed into the same dumb rigidity, with round eyes, hisheels thrust forward and his toes spread out.
Meanwhile the room had become so full of people that you couldn’t havedropped a pin. The policemen left, all except one, who remained for atime, trying to drive out the people who came in from the stairs. Almostall Madame Lippevechsel’s lodgers had streamed in from the inner roomsof the flat; at first they were squeezed together in the doorway, butafterwards they overflowed into the room. Katerina Ivanovna flew into afury.
“You might let him die in peace, at least,” she shouted at the crowd,“is it a spectacle for you to gape at? With cigarettes! (Cough, cough,cough!) You might as well keep your hats on.... And there is one in hishat!... Get away! You should respect the dead, at least!”
Her cough choked her--but her reproaches were not without result. Theyevidently stood in some awe of Katerina Ivanovna. The lodgers, one afteranother, squeezed back into the doorway with that strange inner feelingof satisfaction which may be observed in the presence of a suddenaccident, even in those nearest and dearest to the victim, from whichno living man is exempt, even in spite of the sincerest sympathy andcompassion.
Voices outside were heard, however, speaking of the hospital and sayingthat they’d no business to make a disturbance here.
“No business to die!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, and she was rushing tothe door to vent her wrath upon them, but in the doorway came face toface with Madame Lippevechsel who had only just heard of the accidentand ran in to restore order. She was a particularly quarrelsome andirresponsible German.
“Ah, my God!” she cried, clasping her hands, “your husband drunkenhorses have trampled! To the hospital with him! I am the landlady!”
“Amalia Ludwigovna, I beg you to recollect what you are saying,”Katerina Ivanovna began haughtily (she always took a haughty tone withthe landlady that she might “remember her place” and even now could notdeny herself this satisfaction). “Amalia Ludwigovna...”
“I have you once before told that you to call me Amalia Ludwigovna maynot dare; I am Amalia Ivanovna.”
“You are not Amalia Ivanovna, but Amalia Ludwigovna, and as I am notone of your despicable flatterers like Mr. Lebeziatnikov, who’s laughingbehind the door at this moment (a laugh and a cry of ‘they are at itagain’ was in fact audible at the door) so I shall always call youAmalia Ludwigovna, though I fail to understand why you dislike thatname. You can see for yourself what has happened to Semyon Zaharovitch;he is dying. I beg you to close that door at once and to admit no one.Let him at least die in peace! Or I warn you the Governor-General,himself, shall be informed of your conduct to-morrow. The prince knewme as a girl; he remembers Semyon Zaharovitch well and has often beena benefactor to him. Everyone knows that Semyon Zaharovitch had manyfriends and protectors, whom he abandoned himself from an honourablepride, knowing his unhappy weakness, but now (she pointed toRaskolnikov) a generous young man has come to our assistance, who haswealth and connections and whom Semyon Zaharovitch has known from achild. You may rest assured, Amalia Ludwigovna...”
All this was uttered with extreme rapidity, getting quicker and quicker,but a cough suddenly cut short Katerina Ivanovna’s eloquence. At thatinstant the dying man recovered consciousness and uttered a groan; sheran to him. The injured man opened his eyes and without recognition orunderstanding gazed at Raskolnikov who was bending over him. He drewdeep, slow, painful breaths; blood oozed at the corners of his mouthand drops of perspiration came out on his forehead. Not recognisingRaskolnikov, he began looking round uneasily. Katerina Ivanovna lookedat him with a sad but stern face, and tears trickled from her eyes.
“My God! His whole chest is crushed! How he is bleeding,” she saidin despair. “We must take off his clothes. Turn a little, SemyonZaharovitch, if you can,” she cried to him.
Marmeladov recognised her.
“A priest,” he articulated huskily.
Katerina Ivanovna walked to the window, laid her head against the windowframe and exclaimed in despair:
“Oh, cursed life!”
“A priest,” the dying man said again after a moment’s silence.
“They’ve gone for him,” Katerina Ivanovna shouted to him, he obeyed hershout and was silent. With sad and timid eyes he looked for her; shereturned and stood by his pillow. He seemed a little easier but not forlong.
Soon his eyes rested on little Lida, his favourite, who was shaking inthe corner, as though she were in a fit, and staring at him with herwondering childish eyes.
“A-ah,” he signed towards her uneasily. He wanted to say something.
“What now?” cried Katerina Ivanovna.
“Barefoot, barefoot!” he muttered, indicating with frenzied eyes thechild’s bare feet.
“Be silent,” Katerina Ivanovna cried irritably, “you know why she isbarefooted.”
“Thank God, the doctor,” exclaimed Raskolnikov, relieved.
The doctor came in, a precise little old man, a German, looking abouthim mistrustfully; he went up to the sick man, took his pulse, carefullyfelt his head and with the help of Katerina Ivanovna he unbuttoned theblood-stained shirt, and bared the injured man’s chest. It was gashed,crushed and fractured, several ribs on the right side were broken.On the left side, just over the heart, was a large, sinister-lookingyellowish-black bruise--a cruel kick from the horse’s hoof. The doctorfrowned. The policeman told him that he was caught in the wheel andturned round with it for thirty yards on the road.
“It’s wonderful that he has recovered consciousness,” the doctorwhispered softly to Raskolnikov.
“What do you think of him?” he asked.
“He will die immediately.”
“Is there really no hope?”
“Not the faintest! He is at the last gasp.... His head is badly injured,too... Hm... I could bleed him if you like, but... it would be useless.He is bound to die within the next five or ten minutes.”
“Better bleed him then.”
“If you like.... But I warn you it will be perfectly useless.”
At that moment other steps were heard; the crowd in the passage parted,and the priest, a little, grey old man, appeared in the doorway bearingthe sacrament. A policeman had gone for him at the time of the accident.The doctor changed places with him, exchanging glances with him.Raskolnikov begged the doctor to remain a little while. He shrugged hisshoulders and remained.
All stepped back. The confession was soon over. The dying man probablyunderstood little; he could only utter indistinct broken sounds.Katerina Ivanovna took little Lida, lifted the boy from the chair, kneltdown in the corner by the stove and made the children kneel in front ofher. The little girl was still trembling; but the boy, kneeling on hislittle bare knees, lifted his hand rhythmically, crossing himself withprecision and bowed down, touching the floor with his forehead, whichseemed to afford him especial satisfaction. Katerina Ivanovna bit herlips and held back her tears; she prayed, too, now and then pullingstraight the boy’s shirt, and managed to cover the girl’s bare shoulderswith a kerchief, which she took from the chest without rising from herknees or ceasing to pray. Meanwhile the door from the inner rooms wasopened inquisitively again. In the passage the crowd of spectators fromall the flats on the staircase grew denser and denser, but they did notventure beyond the threshold. A single candle-end lighted up the scene.
At that moment Polenka forced her way through the crowd at the door. Shecame in panting from running so fast, took off her kerchief, looked forher mother, went up to her and said, “She’s coming, I met her in thestreet.” Her mother made her kneel beside her.
Timidly and noiselessly a young girl made her way through the crowd,and strange was her appearance in that room, in the midst of want, rags,death and despair. She, too, was in rags, her attire was all ofthe cheapest, but decked out in gutter finery of a special stamp,unmistakably betraying its shameful purpose. Sonia stopped short in thedoorway and looked about her bewildered, unconscious of everything.She forgot her fourth-hand, gaudy silk dress, so unseemly here withits ridiculous long train, and her immense crinoline that filled up thewhole doorway, and her light-coloured shoes, and the parasol she broughtwith her, though it was no use at night, and the absurd round straw hatwith its flaring flame-coloured feather. Under this rakishly-tilted hatwas a pale, frightened little face with lips parted and eyes staring interror. Sonia was a small thin girl of eighteen with fair hair, ratherpretty, with wonderful blue eyes. She looked intently at the bed and thepriest; she too was out of breath with running. At last whispers, somewords in the crowd probably, reached her. She looked down and took astep forward into the room, still keeping close to the door.
The service was over. Katerina Ivanovna went up to her husband again.The priest stepped back and turned to say a few words of admonition andconsolation to Katerina Ivanovna on leaving.
“What am I to do with these?” she interrupted sharply and irritably,pointing to the little ones.
“God is merciful; look to the Most High for succour,” the priest began.
“Ach! He is merciful, but not to us.”
“That’s a sin, a sin, madam,” observed the priest, shaking his head.
“And isn’t that a sin?” cried Katerina Ivanovna, pointing to the dyingman.
“Perhaps those who have involuntarily caused the accident will agree tocompensate you, at least for the loss of his earnings.”
“You don’t understand!” cried Katerina Ivanovna angrily waving her hand.“And why should they compensate me? Why, he was drunk and threw himselfunder the horses! What earnings? He brought us in nothing but misery.He drank everything away, the drunkard! He robbed us to get drink, hewasted their lives and mine for drink! And thank God he’s dying! Oneless to keep!”
“You must forgive in the hour of death, that’s a sin, madam, suchfeelings are a great sin.”
Katerina Ivanovna was busy with the dying man; she was giving him water,wiping the blood and sweat from his head, setting his pillow straight,and had only turned now and then for a moment to address the priest. Nowshe flew at him almost in a frenzy.
“Ah, father! That’s words and only words! Forgive! If he’d not been runover, he’d have come home to-day drunk and his only shirt dirty andin rags and he’d have fallen asleep like a log, and I should have beensousing and rinsing till daybreak, washing his rags and the children’sand then drying them by the window and as soon as it was daylight Ishould have been darning them. That’s how I spend my nights!... What’sthe use of talking of forgiveness! I have forgiven as it is!”
A terrible hollow cough interrupted her words. She put her handkerchiefto her lips and showed it to the priest, pressing her other hand to heraching chest. The handkerchief was covered with blood. The priest bowedhis head and said nothing.
Marmeladov was in the last agony; he did not take his eyes off the faceof Katerina Ivanovna, who was bending over him again. He kept tryingto say something to her; he began moving his tongue with difficulty andarticulating indistinctly, but Katerina Ivanovna, understanding that hewanted to ask her forgiveness, called peremptorily to him:
“Be silent! No need! I know what you want to say!” And the sick manwas silent, but at the same instant his wandering eyes strayed to thedoorway and he saw Sonia.
Till then he had not noticed her: she was standing in the shadow in acorner.
“Who’s that? Who’s that?” he said suddenly in a thick gasping voice,in agitation, turning his eyes in horror towards the door where hisdaughter was standing, and trying to sit up.
“Lie down! Lie do-own!” cried Katerina Ivanovna.
With unnatural strength he had succeeded in propping himself on hiselbow. He looked wildly and fixedly for some time on his daughter, asthough not recognising her. He had never seen her before in such attire.Suddenly he recognised her, crushed and ashamed in her humiliation andgaudy finery, meekly awaiting her turn to say good-bye to her dyingfather. His face showed intense suffering.
“Sonia! Daughter! Forgive!” he cried, and he tried to hold out his handto her, but losing his balance, he fell off the sofa, face downwards onthe floor. They rushed to pick him up, they put him on the sofa; but hewas dying. Sonia with a faint cry ran up, embraced him and remained sowithout moving. He died in her arms.
“He’s got what he wanted,” Katerina Ivanovna cried, seeing her husband’sdead body. “Well, what’s to be done now? How am I to bury him! What canI give them to-morrow to eat?”
Raskolnikov went up to Katerina Ivanovna.
“Katerina Ivanovna,” he began, “last week your husband told me all hislife and circumstances.... Believe me, he spoke of you with passionatereverence. From that evening, when I learnt how devoted he was to youall and how he loved and respected you especially, Katerina Ivanovna,in spite of his unfortunate weakness, from that evening we becamefriends.... Allow me now... to do something... to repay my debt to mydead friend. Here are twenty roubles, I think--and if that can be of anyassistance to you, then... I... in short, I will come again, I willbe sure to come again... I shall, perhaps, come again to-morrow....Good-bye!”
And he went quickly out of the room, squeezing his way through the crowdto the stairs. But in the crowd he suddenly jostled against NikodimFomitch, who had heard of the accident and had come to give instructionsin person. They had not met since the scene at the police station, butNikodim Fomitch knew him instantly.
“Ah, is that you?” he asked him.
“He’s dead,” answered Raskolnikov. “The doctor and the priest have been,all as it should have been. Don’t worry the poor woman too much, she isin consumption as it is. Try and cheer her up, if possible... you are akind-hearted man, I know...” he added with a smile, looking straight inhis face.
“But you are spattered with blood,” observed Nikodim Fomitch, noticingin the lamplight some fresh stains on Raskolnikov’s waistcoat.
“Yes... I’m covered with blood,” Raskolnikov said with a peculiar air;then he smiled, nodded and went downstairs.
He walked down slowly and deliberately, feverish but not consciousof it, entirely absorbed in a new overwhelming sensation of life andstrength that surged up suddenly within him. This sensation might becompared to that of a man condemned to death who has suddenly beenpardoned. Halfway down the staircase he was overtaken by the priest onhis way home; Raskolnikov let him pass, exchanging a silent greetingwith him. He was just descending the last steps when he heard rapidfootsteps behind him. Someone overtook him; it was Polenka. She wasrunning after him, calling “Wait! wait!”
He turned round. She was at the bottom of the staircase and stoppedshort a step above him. A dim light came in from the yard. Raskolnikovcould distinguish the child’s thin but pretty little face, looking athim with a bright childish smile. She had run after him with a messagewhich she was evidently glad to give.
“Tell me, what is your name?... and where do you live?” she saidhurriedly in a breathless voice.
He laid both hands on her shoulders and looked at her with a sort ofrapture. It was such a joy to him to look at her, he could not have saidwhy.
“Who sent you?”
“Sister Sonia sent me,” answered the girl, smiling still more brightly.
“I knew it was sister Sonia sent you.”
“Mamma sent me, too... when sister Sonia was sending me, mamma came up,too, and said ‘Run fast, Polenka.’”
“Do you love sister Sonia?”
“I love her more than anyone,” Polenka answered with a peculiarearnestness, and her smile became graver.
“And will you love me?”
By way of answer he saw the little girl’s face approaching him, her fulllips naïvely held out to kiss him. Suddenly her arms as thin as sticksheld him tightly, her head rested on his shoulder and the little girlwept softly, pressing her face against him.
“I am sorry for father,” she said a moment later, raising hertear-stained face and brushing away the tears with her hands. “It’snothing but misfortunes now,” she added suddenly with that peculiarlysedate air which children try hard to assume when they want to speaklike grown-up people.
“Did your father love you?”
“He loved Lida most,” she went on very seriously without a smile,exactly like grown-up people, “he loved her because she is little andbecause she is ill, too. And he always used to bring her presents. Buthe taught us to read and me grammar and scripture, too,” she added withdignity. “And mother never used to say anything, but we knew that sheliked it and father knew it, too. And mother wants to teach me French,for it’s time my education began.”
“And do you know your prayers?”
“Of course, we do! We knew them long ago. I say my prayers to myselfas I am a big girl now, but Kolya and Lida say them aloud with mother.First they repeat the ‘Ave Maria’ and then another prayer: ‘Lord,forgive and bless sister Sonia,’ and then another, ‘Lord, forgive andbless our second father.’ For our elder father is dead and this isanother one, but we do pray for the other as well.”
“Polenka, my name is Rodion. Pray sometimes for me, too. ‘And Thyservant Rodion,’ nothing more.”
“I’ll pray for you all the rest of my life,” the little girl declaredhotly, and suddenly smiling again she rushed at him and hugged himwarmly once more.
Raskolnikov told her his name and address and promised to be sure tocome next day. The child went away quite enchanted with him. It was pastten when he came out into the street. In five minutes he was standing onthe bridge at the spot where the woman had jumped in.
“Enough,” he pronounced resolutely and triumphantly. “I’ve done withfancies, imaginary terrors and phantoms! Life is real! haven’t I livedjust now? My life has not yet died with that old woman! The Kingdom ofHeaven to her--and now enough, madam, leave me in peace! Now for thereign of reason and light... and of will, and of strength... and nowwe will see! We will try our strength!” he added defiantly, as thoughchallenging some power of darkness. “And I was ready to consent to livein a square of space!
“I am very weak at this moment, but... I believe my illness is all over.I knew it would be over when I went out. By the way, Potchinkov’s houseis only a few steps away. I certainly must go to Razumihin even ifit were not close by... let him win his bet! Let us give him somesatisfaction, too--no matter! Strength, strength is what one wants, youcan get nothing without it, and strength must be won by strength--that’swhat they don’t know,” he added proudly and self-confidently andhe walked with flagging footsteps from the bridge. Pride andself-confidence grew continually stronger in him; he was becominga different man every moment. What was it had happened to work thisrevolution in him? He did not know himself; like a man catching at astraw, he suddenly felt that he, too, ‘could live, that there was stilllife for him, that his life had not died with the old woman.’ Perhaps hewas in too great a hurry with his conclusions, but he did not think ofthat.
“But I did ask her to remember ‘Thy servant Rodion’ in her prayers,” theidea struck him. “Well, that was... in case of emergency,” he added andlaughed himself at his boyish sally. He was in the best of spirits.
He easily found Razumihin; the new lodger was already known atPotchinkov’s and the porter at once showed him the way. Half-wayupstairs he could hear the noise and animated conversation of a biggathering of people. The door was wide open on the stairs; he couldhear exclamations and discussion. Razumihin’s room was fairly large; thecompany consisted of fifteen people. Raskolnikov stopped in the entry,where two of the landlady’s servants were busy behind a screen with twosamovars, bottles, plates and dishes of pie and savouries, brought upfrom the landlady’s kitchen. Raskolnikov sent in for Razumihin. He ranout delighted. At the first glance it was apparent that he had had agreat deal to drink and, though no amount of liquor made Razumihin quitedrunk, this time he was perceptibly affected by it.
“Listen,” Raskolnikov hastened to say, “I’ve only just come to tell youyou’ve won your bet and that no one really knows what may not happen tohim. I can’t come in; I am so weak that I shall fall down directly. Andso good evening and good-bye! Come and see me to-morrow.”
“Do you know what? I’ll see you home. If you say you’re weak yourself,you must...”
“And your visitors? Who is the curly-headed one who has just peepedout?”
“He? Goodness only knows! Some friend of uncle’s, I expect, or perhapshe has come without being invited... I’ll leave uncle with them, heis an invaluable person, pity I can’t introduce you to him now. Butconfound them all now! They won’t notice me, and I need a little freshair, for you’ve come just in the nick of time--another two minutes and Ishould have come to blows! They are talking such a lot of wild stuff...you simply can’t imagine what men will say! Though why shouldn’t youimagine? Don’t we talk nonsense ourselves? And let them... that’s theway to learn not to!... Wait a minute, I’ll fetch Zossimov.”
Zossimov pounced upon Raskolnikov almost greedily; he showed a specialinterest in him; soon his face brightened.
“You must go to bed at once,” he pronounced, examining the patient asfar as he could, “and take something for the night. Will you take it? Igot it ready some time ago... a powder.”
“Two, if you like,” answered Raskolnikov. The powder was taken at once.
“It’s a good thing you are taking him home,” observed Zossimov toRazumihin--“we shall see how he is to-morrow, to-day he’s not at allamiss--a considerable change since the afternoon. Live and learn...”
“Do you know what Zossimov whispered to me when we were coming out?”Razumihin blurted out, as soon as they were in the street. “I won’t tellyou everything, brother, because they are such fools. Zossimov told meto talk freely to you on the way and get you to talk freely to me, andafterwards I am to tell him about it, for he’s got a notion in his headthat you are... mad or close on it. Only fancy! In the first place,you’ve three times the brains he has; in the second, if you are not mad,you needn’t care a hang that he has got such a wild idea; and thirdly,that piece of beef whose specialty is surgery has gone mad on mentaldiseases, and what’s brought him to this conclusion about you was yourconversation to-day with Zametov.”
“Zametov told you all about it?”
“Yes, and he did well. Now I understand what it all means and so doesZametov.... Well, the fact is, Rodya... the point is... I am a littledrunk now.... But that’s... no matter... the point is that thisidea... you understand? was just being hatched in their brains... youunderstand? That is, no one ventured to say it aloud, because the ideais too absurd and especially since the arrest of that painter, thatbubble’s burst and gone for ever. But why are they such fools? I gaveZametov a bit of a thrashing at the time--that’s between ourselves,brother; please don’t let out a hint that you know of it; I’ve noticedhe is a ticklish subject; it was at Luise Ivanovna’s. But to-day, to-dayit’s all cleared up. That Ilya Petrovitch is at the bottom of it! Hetook advantage of your fainting at the police station, but he is ashamedof it himself now; I know that...”
Raskolnikov listened greedily. Razumihin was drunk enough to talk toofreely.
“I fainted then because it was so close and the smell of paint,” saidRaskolnikov.
“No need to explain that! And it wasn’t the paint only: the fever hadbeen coming on for a month; Zossimov testifies to that! But how crushedthat boy is now, you wouldn’t believe! ‘I am not worth his littlefinger,’ he says. Yours, he means. He has good feelings at times,brother. But the lesson, the lesson you gave him to-day in the Palaisde Cristal, that was too good for anything! You frightened him at first,you know, he nearly went into convulsions! You almost convincedhim again of the truth of all that hideous nonsense, and then yousuddenly--put out your tongue at him: ‘There now, what do you make ofit?’ It was perfect! He is crushed, annihilated now! It was masterly, byJove, it’s what they deserve! Ah, that I wasn’t there! He was hoping tosee you awfully. Porfiry, too, wants to make your acquaintance...”
“Ah!... he too... but why did they put me down as mad?”
“Oh, not mad. I must have said too much, brother.... What struck him,you see, was that only that subject seemed to interest you; now it’sclear why it did interest you; knowing all the circumstances... andhow that irritated you and worked in with your illness... I am a littledrunk, brother, only, confound him, he has some idea of his own... Itell you, he’s mad on mental diseases. But don’t you mind him...”
For half a minute both were silent.
“Listen, Razumihin,” began Raskolnikov, “I want to tell you plainly:I’ve just been at a death-bed, a clerk who died... I gave them all mymoney... and besides I’ve just been kissed by someone who, if I hadkilled anyone, would just the same... in fact I saw someone elsethere... with a flame-coloured feather... but I am talking nonsense; Iam very weak, support me... we shall be at the stairs directly...”
“What’s the matter? What’s the matter with you?” Razumihin askedanxiously.
“I am a little giddy, but that’s not the point, I am so sad, so sad...like a woman. Look, what’s that? Look, look!”
“What is it?”
“Don’t you see? A light in my room, you see? Through the crack...”
They were already at the foot of the last flight of stairs, at the levelof the landlady’s door, and they could, as a fact, see from below thatthere was a light in Raskolnikov’s garret.
“Queer! Nastasya, perhaps,” observed Razumihin.
“She is never in my room at this time and she must be in bed long ago,but... I don’t care! Good-bye!”
“What do you mean? I am coming with you, we’ll come in together!”
“I know we are going in together, but I want to shake hands here and saygood-bye to you here. So give me your hand, good-bye!”
“What’s the matter with you, Rodya?”
“Nothing... come along... you shall be witness.”
They began mounting the stairs, and the idea struck Razumihin thatperhaps Zossimov might be right after all. “Ah, I’ve upset him with mychatter!” he muttered to himself.
When they reached the door they heard voices in the room.
“What is it?” cried Razumihin. Raskolnikov was the first to open thedoor; he flung it wide and stood still in the doorway, dumbfoundered.
His mother and sister were sitting on his sofa and had been waiting anhour and a half for him. Why had he never expected, never thought ofthem, though the news that they had started, were on their way and wouldarrive immediately, had been repeated to him only that day? They hadspent that hour and a half plying Nastasya with questions. She wasstanding before them and had told them everything by now. They werebeside themselves with alarm when they heard of his “running away”to-day, ill and, as they understood from her story, delirious! “GoodHeavens, what had become of him?” Both had been weeping, both had beenin anguish for that hour and a half.
A cry of joy, of ecstasy, greeted Raskolnikov’s entrance. Both rushed tohim. But he stood like one dead; a sudden intolerable sensation struckhim like a thunderbolt. He did not lift his arms to embrace them, hecould not. His mother and sister clasped him in their arms, kissed him,laughed and cried. He took a step, tottered and fell to the ground,fainting.
Anxiety, cries of horror, moans... Razumihin who was standing in thedoorway flew into the room, seized the sick man in his strong arms andin a moment had him on the sofa.
“It’s nothing, nothing!” he cried to the mother and sister--“it’s only afaint, a mere trifle! Only just now the doctor said he was much better,that he is perfectly well! Water! See, he is coming to himself, he isall right again!”
And seizing Dounia by the arm so that he almost dislocated it, he madeher bend down to see that “he is all right again.” The mother and sisterlooked on him with emotion and gratitude, as their Providence. Theyhad heard already from Nastasya all that had been done for their Rodyaduring his illness, by this “very competent young man,” as PulcheriaAlexandrovna Raskolnikov called him that evening in conversation withDounia.
