PART III
CHAPTER I
Raskolnikov got up, and sat down on the sofa. He waved his hand weaklyto Razumihin to cut short the flow of warm and incoherent consolationshe was addressing to his mother and sister, took them both by the handand for a minute or two gazed from one to the other without speaking.His mother was alarmed by his expression. It revealed an emotionagonisingly poignant, and at the same time something immovable, almostinsane. Pulcheria Alexandrovna began to cry.
Avdotya Romanovna was pale; her hand trembled in her brother’s.
“Go home... with him,” he said in a broken voice, pointing to Razumihin,“good-bye till to-morrow; to-morrow everything... Is it long since youarrived?”
“This evening, Rodya,” answered Pulcheria Alexandrovna, “the train wasawfully late. But, Rodya, nothing would induce me to leave you now! Iwill spend the night here, near you...”
“Don’t torture me!” he said with a gesture of irritation.
“I will stay with him,” cried Razumihin, “I won’t leave him for amoment. Bother all my visitors! Let them rage to their hearts’ content!My uncle is presiding there.”
“How, how can I thank you!” Pulcheria Alexandrovna was beginning, oncemore pressing Razumihin’s hands, but Raskolnikov interrupted her again.
“I can’t have it! I can’t have it!” he repeated irritably, “don’t worryme! Enough, go away... I can’t stand it!”
“Come, mamma, come out of the room at least for a minute,” Douniawhispered in dismay; “we are distressing him, that’s evident.”
“Mayn’t I look at him after three years?” wept Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
“Stay,” he stopped them again, “you keep interrupting me, and my ideasget muddled.... Have you seen Luzhin?”
“No, Rodya, but he knows already of our arrival. We have heard, Rodya,that Pyotr Petrovitch was so kind as to visit you today,” PulcheriaAlexandrovna added somewhat timidly.
“Yes... he was so kind... Dounia, I promised Luzhin I’d throw himdownstairs and told him to go to hell....”
“Rodya, what are you saying! Surely, you don’t mean to tell us...”Pulcheria Alexandrovna began in alarm, but she stopped, looking atDounia.
Avdotya Romanovna was looking attentively at her brother, waitingfor what would come next. Both of them had heard of the quarrel fromNastasya, so far as she had succeeded in understanding and reporting it,and were in painful perplexity and suspense.
“Dounia,” Raskolnikov continued with an effort, “I don’t want thatmarriage, so at the first opportunity to-morrow you must refuse Luzhin,so that we may never hear his name again.”
“Good Heavens!” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
“Brother, think what you are saying!” Avdotya Romanovna beganimpetuously, but immediately checked herself. “You are not fit to talknow, perhaps; you are tired,” she added gently.
“You think I am delirious? No... You are marrying Luzhin for _my_sake. But I won’t accept the sacrifice. And so write a letter beforeto-morrow, to refuse him... Let me read it in the morning and that willbe the end of it!”
“That I can’t do!” the girl cried, offended, “what right have you...”
“Dounia, you are hasty, too, be quiet, to-morrow... Don’t you see...”the mother interposed in dismay. “Better come away!”
“He is raving,” Razumihin cried tipsily, “or how would he dare!To-morrow all this nonsense will be over... to-day he certainly diddrive him away. That was so. And Luzhin got angry, too.... He madespeeches here, wanted to show off his learning and he went outcrest-fallen....”
“Then it’s true?” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
“Good-bye till to-morrow, brother,” said Dounia compassionately--“let usgo, mother... Good-bye, Rodya.”
“Do you hear, sister,” he repeated after them, making a last effort,“I am not delirious; this marriage is--an infamy. Let me act likea scoundrel, but you mustn’t... one is enough... and though I am ascoundrel, I wouldn’t own such a sister. It’s me or Luzhin! Go now....”
“But you’re out of your mind! Despot!” roared Razumihin; but Raskolnikovdid not and perhaps could not answer. He lay down on the sofa, andturned to the wall, utterly exhausted. Avdotya Romanovna looked withinterest at Razumihin; her black eyes flashed; Razumihin positivelystarted at her glance.
Pulcheria Alexandrovna stood overwhelmed.
“Nothing would induce me to go,” she whispered in despair to Razumihin.“I will stay somewhere here... escort Dounia home.”
“You’ll spoil everything,” Razumihin answered in the same whisper,losing patience--“come out on to the stairs, anyway. Nastasya, show alight! I assure you,” he went on in a half whisper on the stairs--“thathe was almost beating the doctor and me this afternoon! Do youunderstand? The doctor himself! Even he gave way and left him, so as notto irritate him. I remained downstairs on guard, but he dressed at onceand slipped off. And he will slip off again if you irritate him, at thistime of night, and will do himself some mischief....”
“What are you saying?”
“And Avdotya Romanovna can’t possibly be left in those lodgings withoutyou. Just think where you are staying! That blackguard Pyotr Petrovitchcouldn’t find you better lodgings... But you know I’ve had a little todrink, and that’s what makes me... swear; don’t mind it....”
“But I’ll go to the landlady here,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna insisted,“I’ll beseech her to find some corner for Dounia and me for the night. Ican’t leave him like that, I cannot!”
This conversation took place on the landing just before the landlady’sdoor. Nastasya lighted them from a step below. Razumihin was inextraordinary excitement. Half an hour earlier, while he was bringingRaskolnikov home, he had indeed talked too freely, but he was aware ofit himself, and his head was clear in spite of the vast quantities hehad imbibed. Now he was in a state bordering on ecstasy, and all that hehad drunk seemed to fly to his head with redoubled effect. He stood withthe two ladies, seizing both by their hands, persuading them, and givingthem reasons with astonishing plainness of speech, and at almost everyword he uttered, probably to emphasise his arguments, he squeezed theirhands painfully as in a vise. He stared at Avdotya Romanovna without theleast regard for good manners. They sometimes pulled their hands out ofhis huge bony paws, but far from noticing what was the matter, he drewthem all the closer to him. If they’d told him to jump head foremostfrom the staircase, he would have done it without thought or hesitationin their service. Though Pulcheria Alexandrovna felt that the young manwas really too eccentric and pinched her hand too much, in her anxietyover her Rodya she looked on his presence as providential, and wasunwilling to notice all his peculiarities. But though Avdotya Romanovnashared her anxiety, and was not of timorous disposition, she could notsee the glowing light in his eyes without wonder and almost alarm. Itwas only the unbounded confidence inspired by Nastasya’s account of herbrother’s queer friend, which prevented her from trying to run away fromhim, and to persuade her mother to do the same. She realised, too,that even running away was perhaps impossible now. Ten minutes later,however, she was considerably reassured; it was characteristic ofRazumihin that he showed his true nature at once, whatever mood he mightbe in, so that people quickly saw the sort of man they had to deal with.
“You can’t go to the landlady, that’s perfect nonsense!” he cried. “Ifyou stay, though you are his mother, you’ll drive him to a frenzy, andthen goodness knows what will happen! Listen, I’ll tell you what I’lldo: Nastasya will stay with him now, and I’ll conduct you both home, youcan’t be in the streets alone; Petersburg is an awful place in thatway.... But no matter! Then I’ll run straight back here and a quarter ofan hour later, on my word of honour, I’ll bring you news how he is,whether he is asleep, and all that. Then, listen! Then I’ll run home ina twinkling--I’ve a lot of friends there, all drunk--I’ll fetchZossimov--that’s the doctor who is looking after him, he is there, too,but he is not drunk; he is not drunk, he is never drunk! I’ll drag himto Rodya, and then to you, so that you’ll get two reports in thehour--from the doctor, you understand, from the doctor himself, that’s avery different thing from my account of him! If there’s anything wrong,I swear I’ll bring you here myself, but, if it’s all right, you go tobed. And I’ll spend the night here, in the passage, he won’t hear me,and I’ll tell Zossimov to sleep at the landlady’s, to be at hand. Whichis better for him: you or the doctor? So come home then! But thelandlady is out of the question; it’s all right for me, but it’s out ofthe question for you: she wouldn’t take you, for she’s... for she’s afool... She’d be jealous on my account of Avdotya Romanovna and of you,too, if you want to know... of Avdotya Romanovna certainly. She is anabsolutely, absolutely unaccountable character! But I am a fool, too!...No matter! Come along! Do you trust me? Come, do you trust me or not?”
“Let us go, mother,” said Avdotya Romanovna, “he will certainly do whathe has promised. He has saved Rodya already, and if the doctor reallywill consent to spend the night here, what could be better?”
“You see, you... you... understand me, because you are an angel!”Razumihin cried in ecstasy, “let us go! Nastasya! Fly upstairs and sitwith him with a light; I’ll come in a quarter of an hour.”
Though Pulcheria Alexandrovna was not perfectly convinced, she made nofurther resistance. Razumihin gave an arm to each and drew them downthe stairs. He still made her uneasy, as though he was competent andgood-natured, was he capable of carrying out his promise? He seemed insuch a condition....
“Ah, I see you think I am in such a condition!” Razumihin broke in uponher thoughts, guessing them, as he strolled along the pavement with hugesteps, so that the two ladies could hardly keep up with him, a fact hedid not observe, however. “Nonsense! That is... I am drunk like a fool,but that’s not it; I am not drunk from wine. It’s seeing you has turnedmy head... But don’t mind me! Don’t take any notice: I am talkingnonsense, I am not worthy of you.... I am utterly unworthy of you! Theminute I’ve taken you home, I’ll pour a couple of pailfuls of water overmy head in the gutter here, and then I shall be all right.... If onlyyou knew how I love you both! Don’t laugh, and don’t be angry! You maybe angry with anyone, but not with me! I am his friend, and therefore Iam your friend, too, I want to be... I had a presentiment... Last yearthere was a moment... though it wasn’t a presentiment really, foryou seem to have fallen from heaven. And I expect I shan’t sleep allnight... Zossimov was afraid a little time ago that he would go mad...that’s why he mustn’t be irritated.”
“What do you say?” cried the mother.
“Did the doctor really say that?” asked Avdotya Romanovna, alarmed.
“Yes, but it’s not so, not a bit of it. He gave him some medicine, apowder, I saw it, and then your coming here.... Ah! It would have beenbetter if you had come to-morrow. It’s a good thing we went away. And inan hour Zossimov himself will report to you about everything. He is notdrunk! And I shan’t be drunk.... And what made me get so tight? Becausethey got me into an argument, damn them! I’ve sworn never to argue! Theytalk such trash! I almost came to blows! I’ve left my uncle to preside.Would you believe, they insist on complete absence of individualismand that’s just what they relish! Not to be themselves, to be as unlikethemselves as they can. That’s what they regard as the highest point ofprogress. If only their nonsense were their own, but as it is...”
“Listen!” Pulcheria Alexandrovna interrupted timidly, but it only addedfuel to the flames.
“What do you think?” shouted Razumihin, louder than ever, “you think Iam attacking them for talking nonsense? Not a bit! I like them to talknonsense. That’s man’s one privilege over all creation. Through erroryou come to the truth! I am a man because I err! You never reach anytruth without making fourteen mistakes and very likely a hundred andfourteen. And a fine thing, too, in its way; but we can’t even makemistakes on our own account! Talk nonsense, but talk your own nonsense,and I’ll kiss you for it. To go wrong in one’s own way is better thanto go right in someone else’s. In the first case you are a man, in thesecond you’re no better than a bird. Truth won’t escape you, but lifecan be cramped. There have been examples. And what are we doing now?In science, development, thought, invention, ideals, aims, liberalism,judgment, experience and everything, everything, everything, we arestill in the preparatory class at school. We prefer to live on otherpeople’s ideas, it’s what we are used to! Am I right, am I right?” criedRazumihin, pressing and shaking the two ladies’ hands.
“Oh, mercy, I do not know,” cried poor Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
“Yes, yes... though I don’t agree with you in everything,” added AvdotyaRomanovna earnestly and at once uttered a cry, for he squeezed her handso painfully.
“Yes, you say yes... well after that you... you...” he cried ina transport, “you are a fount of goodness, purity, sense... andperfection. Give me your hand... you give me yours, too! I want to kissyour hands here at once, on my knees...” and he fell on his knees on thepavement, fortunately at that time deserted.
“Leave off, I entreat you, what are you doing?” Pulcheria Alexandrovnacried, greatly distressed.
“Get up, get up!” said Dounia laughing, though she, too, was upset.
“Not for anything till you let me kiss your hands! That’s it! Enough! Iget up and we’ll go on! I am a luckless fool, I am unworthy of you anddrunk... and I am ashamed.... I am not worthy to love you, but to dohomage to you is the duty of every man who is not a perfect beast! AndI’ve done homage.... Here are your lodgings, and for that alone Rodyawas right in driving your Pyotr Petrovitch away.... How dare he! howdare he put you in such lodgings! It’s a scandal! Do you know thesort of people they take in here? And you his betrothed! You arehis betrothed? Yes? Well, then, I’ll tell you, your _fiancé_ is ascoundrel.”
“Excuse me, Mr. Razumihin, you are forgetting...” Pulcheria Alexandrovnawas beginning.
“Yes, yes, you are right, I did forget myself, I am ashamed of it,”Razumihin made haste to apologise. “But... but you can’t be angry withme for speaking so! For I speak sincerely and not because... hm, hm!That would be disgraceful; in fact not because I’m in... hm! Well,anyway, I won’t say why, I daren’t.... But we all saw to-day when hecame in that that man is not of our sort. Not because he had his haircurled at the barber’s, not because he was in such a hurry to show hiswit, but because he is a spy, a speculator, because he is a skin-flintand a buffoon. That’s evident. Do you think him clever? No, he is afool, a fool. And is he a match for you? Good heavens! Do you see,ladies?” he stopped suddenly on the way upstairs to their rooms, “thoughall my friends there are drunk, yet they are all honest, and though wedo talk a lot of trash, and I do, too, yet we shall talk our way to thetruth at last, for we are on the right path, while Pyotr Petrovitch...is not on the right path. Though I’ve been calling them all sorts ofnames just now, I do respect them all... though I don’t respect Zametov,I like him, for he is a puppy, and that bullock Zossimov, because heis an honest man and knows his work. But enough, it’s all said andforgiven. Is it forgiven? Well, then, let’s go on. I know this corridor,I’ve been here, there was a scandal here at Number 3.... Where are youhere? Which number? eight? Well, lock yourselves in for the night, then.Don’t let anybody in. In a quarter of an hour I’ll come back with news,and half an hour later I’ll bring Zossimov, you’ll see! Good-bye, I’llrun.”
“Good heavens, Dounia, what is going to happen?” said PulcheriaAlexandrovna, addressing her daughter with anxiety and dismay.
“Don’t worry yourself, mother,” said Dounia, taking off her hat andcape. “God has sent this gentleman to our aid, though he has come from adrinking party. We can depend on him, I assure you. And all that he hasdone for Rodya....”
“Ah. Dounia, goodness knows whether he will come! How could I bringmyself to leave Rodya?... And how different, how different I had fanciedour meeting! How sullen he was, as though not pleased to see us....”
Tears came into her eyes.
“No, it’s not that, mother. You didn’t see, you were crying all thetime. He is quite unhinged by serious illness--that’s the reason.”
“Ah, that illness! What will happen, what will happen? And how he talkedto you, Dounia!” said the mother, looking timidly at her daughter,trying to read her thoughts and, already half consoled by Dounia’sstanding up for her brother, which meant that she had already forgivenhim. “I am sure he will think better of it to-morrow,” she added,probing her further.
“And I am sure that he will say the same to-morrow... about that,”Avdotya Romanovna said finally. And, of course, there was no goingbeyond that, for this was a point which Pulcheria Alexandrovna wasafraid to discuss. Dounia went up and kissed her mother. The latterwarmly embraced her without speaking. Then she sat down to waitanxiously for Razumihin’s return, timidly watching her daughter whowalked up and down the room with her arms folded, lost in thought.This walking up and down when she was thinking was a habit of AvdotyaRomanovna’s and the mother was always afraid to break in on herdaughter’s mood at such moments.
Razumihin, of course, was ridiculous in his sudden drunken infatuationfor Avdotya Romanovna. Yet apart from his eccentric condition, manypeople would have thought it justified if they had seen AvdotyaRomanovna, especially at that moment when she was walking to andfro with folded arms, pensive and melancholy. Avdotya Romanovna wasremarkably good-looking; she was tall, strikingly well-proportioned,strong and self-reliant--the latter quality was apparent in everygesture, though it did not in the least detract from the grace andsoftness of her movements. In face she resembled her brother, but shemight be described as really beautiful. Her hair was dark brown, alittle lighter than her brother’s; there was a proud light in her almostblack eyes and yet at times a look of extraordinary kindness. She waspale, but it was a healthy pallor; her face was radiant with freshnessand vigour. Her mouth was rather small; the full red lower lip projecteda little as did her chin; it was the only irregularity in her beautifulface, but it gave it a peculiarly individual and almost haughtyexpression. Her face was always more serious and thoughtful than gay;but how well smiles, how well youthful, lighthearted, irresponsible,laughter suited her face! It was natural enough that a warm, open,simple-hearted, honest giant like Razumihin, who had never seen anyonelike her and was not quite sober at the time, should lose his headimmediately. Besides, as chance would have it, he saw Dounia for thefirst time transfigured by her love for her brother and her joy atmeeting him. Afterwards he saw her lower lip quiver with indignationat her brother’s insolent, cruel and ungrateful words--and his fate wassealed.
He had spoken the truth, moreover, when he blurted out in his drunkentalk on the stairs that Praskovya Pavlovna, Raskolnikov’s eccentriclandlady, would be jealous of Pulcheria Alexandrovna as well as ofAvdotya Romanovna on his account. Although Pulcheria Alexandrovna wasforty-three, her face still retained traces of her former beauty; shelooked much younger than her age, indeed, which is almost always thecase with women who retain serenity of spirit, sensitiveness and puresincere warmth of heart to old age. We may add in parenthesis that topreserve all this is the only means of retaining beauty to old age. Herhair had begun to grow grey and thin, there had long been little crow’sfoot wrinkles round her eyes, her cheeks were hollow and sunken fromanxiety and grief, and yet it was a handsome face. She was Douniaover again, twenty years older, but without the projecting underlip.Pulcheria Alexandrovna was emotional, but not sentimental, timid andyielding, but only to a certain point. She could give way and accept agreat deal even of what was contrary to her convictions, but there was acertain barrier fixed by honesty, principle and the deepest convictionswhich nothing would induce her to cross.
Exactly twenty minutes after Razumihin’s departure, there came twosubdued but hurried knocks at the door: he had come back.
“I won’t come in, I haven’t time,” he hastened to say when the door wasopened. “He sleeps like a top, soundly, quietly, and God grant he maysleep ten hours. Nastasya’s with him; I told her not to leave till Icame. Now I am fetching Zossimov, he will report to you and then you’dbetter turn in; I can see you are too tired to do anything....”
And he ran off down the corridor.
“What a very competent and... devoted young man!” cried PulcheriaAlexandrovna exceedingly delighted.
“He seems a splendid person!” Avdotya Romanovna replied with somewarmth, resuming her walk up and down the room.
It was nearly an hour later when they heard footsteps in the corridorand another knock at the door. Both women waited this time completelyrelying on Razumihin’s promise; he actually had succeeded in bringingZossimov. Zossimov had agreed at once to desert the drinking party togo to Raskolnikov’s, but he came reluctantly and with the greatestsuspicion to see the ladies, mistrusting Razumihin in his exhilaratedcondition. But his vanity was at once reassured and flattered; he sawthat they were really expecting him as an oracle. He stayed just tenminutes and succeeded in completely convincing and comforting PulcheriaAlexandrovna. He spoke with marked sympathy, but with the reserve andextreme seriousness of a young doctor at an important consultation.He did not utter a word on any other subject and did not display theslightest desire to enter into more personal relations with the twoladies. Remarking at his first entrance the dazzling beauty of AvdotyaRomanovna, he endeavoured not to notice her at all during his visit andaddressed himself solely to Pulcheria Alexandrovna. All this gave himextraordinary inward satisfaction. He declared that he thought theinvalid at this moment going on very satisfactorily. According to hisobservations the patient’s illness was due partly to his unfortunatematerial surroundings during the last few months, but it had partly alsoa moral origin, “was, so to speak, the product of several material andmoral influences, anxieties, apprehensions, troubles, certain ideas...and so on.” Noticing stealthily that Avdotya Romanovna was following hiswords with close attention, Zossimov allowed himself to enlarge on thistheme. On Pulcheria Alexandrovna’s anxiously and timidly inquiring asto “some suspicion of insanity,” he replied with a composed and candidsmile that his words had been exaggerated; that certainly the patienthad some fixed idea, something approaching a monomania--he, Zossimov,was now particularly studying this interesting branch of medicine--butthat it must be recollected that until to-day the patient had been indelirium and... and that no doubt the presence of his family would havea favourable effect on his recovery and distract his mind, “if only allfresh shocks can be avoided,” he added significantly. Then he got up,took leave with an impressive and affable bow, while blessings, warmgratitude, and entreaties were showered upon him, and Avdotya Romanovnaspontaneously offered her hand to him. He went out exceedingly pleasedwith his visit and still more so with himself.
“We’ll talk to-morrow; go to bed at once!” Razumihin said in conclusion,following Zossimov out. “I’ll be with you to-morrow morning as early aspossible with my report.”
“That’s a fetching little girl, Avdotya Romanovna,” remarked Zossimov,almost licking his lips as they both came out into the street.
“Fetching? You said fetching?” roared Razumihin and he flew at Zossimovand seized him by the throat. “If you ever dare.... Do you understand?Do you understand?” he shouted, shaking him by the collar and squeezinghim against the wall. “Do you hear?”
“Let me go, you drunken devil,” said Zossimov, struggling and when hehad let him go, he stared at him and went off into a sudden guffaw.Razumihin stood facing him in gloomy and earnest reflection.
“Of course, I am an ass,” he observed, sombre as a storm cloud, “butstill... you are another.”
“No, brother, not at all such another. I am not dreaming of any folly.”
They walked along in silence and only when they were close toRaskolnikov’s lodgings, Razumihin broke the silence in considerableanxiety.
“Listen,” he said, “you’re a first-rate fellow, but among your otherfailings, you’re a loose fish, that I know, and a dirty one, too. Youare a feeble, nervous wretch, and a mass of whims, you’re getting fatand lazy and can’t deny yourself anything--and I call that dirty becauseit leads one straight into the dirt. You’ve let yourself get so slackthat I don’t know how it is you are still a good, even a devoted doctor.You--a doctor--sleep on a feather bed and get up at night to yourpatients! In another three or four years you won’t get up for yourpatients... But hang it all, that’s not the point!... You are goingto spend to-night in the landlady’s flat here. (Hard work I’ve had topersuade her!) And I’ll be in the kitchen. So here’s a chance for you toget to know her better.... It’s not as you think! There’s not a trace ofanything of the sort, brother...!”
“But I don’t think!”
“Here you have modesty, brother, silence, bashfulness, a savagevirtue... and yet she’s sighing and melting like wax, simply melting!Save me from her, by all that’s unholy! She’s most prepossessing... I’llrepay you, I’ll do anything....”
Zossimov laughed more violently than ever.
“Well, you are smitten! But what am I to do with her?”
“It won’t be much trouble, I assure you. Talk any rot you like to her,as long as you sit by her and talk. You’re a doctor, too; try curingher of something. I swear you won’t regret it. She has a piano, and youknow, I strum a little. I have a song there, a genuine Russian one: ‘Ished hot tears.’ She likes the genuine article--and well, it allbegan with that song; Now you’re a regular performer, a _maître_, aRubinstein.... I assure you, you won’t regret it!”
“But have you made her some promise? Something signed? A promise ofmarriage, perhaps?”
“Nothing, nothing, absolutely nothing of the kind! Besides she is notthat sort at all.... Tchebarov tried that....”
“Well then, drop her!”
“But I can’t drop her like that!”
“Why can’t you?”
“Well, I can’t, that’s all about it! There’s an element of attractionhere, brother.”
“Then why have you fascinated her?”
“I haven’t fascinated her; perhaps I was fascinated myself in my folly.But she won’t care a straw whether it’s you or I, so long as somebodysits beside her, sighing.... I can’t explain the position, brother...look here, you are good at mathematics, and working at it now... beginteaching her the integral calculus; upon my soul, I’m not joking, I’min earnest, it’ll be just the same to her. She will gaze at you and sighfor a whole year together. I talked to her once for two days at a timeabout the Prussian House of Lords (for one must talk of something)--shejust sighed and perspired! And you mustn’t talk of love--she’s bashfulto hysterics--but just let her see you can’t tear yourself away--that’senough. It’s fearfully comfortable; you’re quite at home, you canread, sit, lie about, write. You may even venture on a kiss, if you’recareful.”
“But what do I want with her?”
“Ach, I can’t make you understand! You see, you are made for each other!I have often been reminded of you!... You’ll come to it in the end! Sodoes it matter whether it’s sooner or later? There’s the feather-bedelement here, brother--ach! and not only that! There’s an attractionhere--here you have the end of the world, an anchorage, a quiet haven,the navel of the earth, the three fishes that are the foundation of theworld, the essence of pancakes, of savoury fish-pies, of the eveningsamovar, of soft sighs and warm shawls, and hot stoves to sleep on--assnug as though you were dead, and yet you’re alive--the advantagesof both at once! Well, hang it, brother, what stuff I’m talking, it’sbedtime! Listen. I sometimes wake up at night; so I’ll go in and look athim. But there’s no need, it’s all right. Don’t you worry yourself,yet if you like, you might just look in once, too. But if you noticeanything--delirium or fever--wake me at once. But there can’t be....”
CHAPTER II
Razumihin waked up next morning at eight o’clock, troubled and serious.He found himself confronted with many new and unlooked-for perplexities.He had never expected that he would ever wake up feeling like that. Heremembered every detail of the previous day and he knew that a perfectlynovel experience had befallen him, that he had received an impressionunlike anything he had known before. At the same time he recognisedclearly that the dream which had fired his imagination was hopelesslyunattainable--so unattainable that he felt positively ashamed of it, andhe hastened to pass to the other more practical cares and difficultiesbequeathed him by that “thrice accursed yesterday.”
The most awful recollection of the previous day was the way he had shownhimself “base and mean,” not only because he had been drunk, butbecause he had taken advantage of the young girl’s position to abuseher _fiancé_ in his stupid jealousy, knowing nothing of their mutualrelations and obligations and next to nothing of the man himself. Andwhat right had he to criticise him in that hasty and unguarded manner?Who had asked for his opinion? Was it thinkable that such a creature asAvdotya Romanovna would be marrying an unworthy man for money? So theremust be something in him. The lodgings? But after all how could he knowthe character of the lodgings? He was furnishing a flat... Foo! howdespicable it all was! And what justification was it that he was drunk?Such a stupid excuse was even more degrading! In wine is truth, and thetruth had all come out, “that is, all the uncleanness of his coarseand envious heart”! And would such a dream ever be permissible tohim, Razumihin? What was he beside such a girl--he, the drunken noisybraggart of last night? Was it possible to imagine so absurd and cynicala juxtaposition? Razumihin blushed desperately at the very idea andsuddenly the recollection forced itself vividly upon him of how he hadsaid last night on the stairs that the landlady would be jealous ofAvdotya Romanovna... that was simply intolerable. He brought his fistdown heavily on the kitchen stove, hurt his hand and sent one of thebricks flying.
“Of course,” he muttered to himself a minute later with a feeling ofself-abasement, “of course, all these infamies can never be wiped out orsmoothed over... and so it’s useless even to think of it, and I mustgo to them in silence and do my duty... in silence, too... and not askforgiveness, and say nothing... for all is lost now!”
And yet as he dressed he examined his attire more carefully than usual.He hadn’t another suit--if he had had, perhaps he wouldn’t have put iton. “I would have made a point of not putting it on.” But in any case hecould not remain a cynic and a dirty sloven; he had no right to offendthe feelings of others, especially when they were in need of hisassistance and asking him to see them. He brushed his clothes carefully.His linen was always decent; in that respect he was especially clean.
He washed that morning scrupulously--he got some soap from Nastasya--hewashed his hair, his neck and especially his hands. When it came to thequestion whether to shave his stubbly chin or not (Praskovya Pavlovnahad capital razors that had been left by her late husband), the questionwas angrily answered in the negative. “Let it stay as it is! What ifthey think that I shaved on purpose to...? They certainly would thinkso! Not on any account!”
“And... the worst of it was he was so coarse, so dirty, he had themanners of a pothouse; and... and even admitting that he knew he hadsome of the essentials of a gentleman... what was there in that to beproud of? Everyone ought to be a gentleman and more than that... and allthe same (he remembered) he, too, had done little things... not exactlydishonest, and yet.... And what thoughts he sometimes had; hm... and toset all that beside Avdotya Romanovna! Confound it! So be it! Well, he’dmake a point then of being dirty, greasy, pothouse in his manners and hewouldn’t care! He’d be worse!”
He was engaged in such monologues when Zossimov, who had spent the nightin Praskovya Pavlovna’s parlour, came in.
He was going home and was in a hurry to look at the invalid first.Razumihin informed him that Raskolnikov was sleeping like a dormouse.Zossimov gave orders that they shouldn’t wake him and promised to seehim again about eleven.
“If he is still at home,” he added. “Damn it all! If one can’t controlone’s patients, how is one to cure them? Do you know whether _he_ willgo to them, or whether _they_ are coming here?”
“They are coming, I think,” said Razumihin, understanding the objectof the question, “and they will discuss their family affairs, no doubt.I’ll be off. You, as the doctor, have more right to be here than I.”
“But I am not a father confessor; I shall come and go away; I’ve plentyto do besides looking after them.”
“One thing worries me,” interposed Razumihin, frowning. “On the way homeI talked a lot of drunken nonsense to him... all sorts of things... andamongst them that you were afraid that he... might become insane.”
“You told the ladies so, too.”
“I know it was stupid! You may beat me if you like! Did you think soseriously?”
“That’s nonsense, I tell you, how could I think it seriously? You,yourself, described him as a monomaniac when you fetched me tohim... and we added fuel to the fire yesterday, you did, that is, withyour story about the painter; it was a nice conversation, when he was,perhaps, mad on that very point! If only I’d known what happened thenat the police station and that some wretch... had insulted him with thissuspicion! Hm... I would not have allowed that conversation yesterday.These monomaniacs will make a mountain out of a mole-hill... andsee their fancies as solid realities.... As far as I remember, it wasZametov’s story that cleared up half the mystery, to my mind. Why, Iknow one case in which a hypochondriac, a man of forty, cut the throatof a little boy of eight, because he couldn’t endure the jokes he madeevery day at table! And in this case his rags, the insolent policeofficer, the fever and this suspicion! All that working upon a man halffrantic with hypochondria, and with his morbid exceptional vanity! Thatmay well have been the starting-point of illness. Well, bother itall!... And, by the way, that Zametov certainly is a nice fellow, buthm... he shouldn’t have told all that last night. He is an awfulchatterbox!”
“But whom did he tell it to? You and me?”
“And Porfiry.”
“What does that matter?”
“And, by the way, have you any influence on them, his mother and sister?Tell them to be more careful with him to-day....”
“They’ll get on all right!” Razumihin answered reluctantly.
“Why is he so set against this Luzhin? A man with money and she doesn’tseem to dislike him... and they haven’t a farthing, I suppose? eh?”
“But what business is it of yours?” Razumihin cried with annoyance. “Howcan I tell whether they’ve a farthing? Ask them yourself and perhapsyou’ll find out....”
“Foo! what an ass you are sometimes! Last night’s wine has not gone offyet.... Good-bye; thank your Praskovya Pavlovna from me for my night’slodging. She locked herself in, made no reply to my _bonjour_ throughthe door; she was up at seven o’clock, the samovar was taken into herfrom the kitchen. I was not vouchsafed a personal interview....”
At nine o’clock precisely Razumihin reached the lodgings at Bakaleyev’shouse. Both ladies were waiting for him with nervous impatience. Theyhad risen at seven o’clock or earlier. He entered looking as black asnight, bowed awkwardly and was at once furious with himself for it. Hehad reckoned without his host: Pulcheria Alexandrovna fairly rushed athim, seized him by both hands and was almost kissing them. He glancedtimidly at Avdotya Romanovna, but her proud countenance wore at thatmoment an expression of such gratitude and friendliness, suchcomplete and unlooked-for respect (in place of the sneering looks andill-disguised contempt he had expected), that it threw him into greaterconfusion than if he had been met with abuse. Fortunately there was asubject for conversation, and he made haste to snatch at it.
Hearing that everything was going well and that Rodya had not yet waked,Pulcheria Alexandrovna declared that she was glad to hear it, because“she had something which it was very, very necessary to talk overbeforehand.” Then followed an inquiry about breakfast and an invitationto have it with them; they had waited to have it with him. AvdotyaRomanovna rang the bell: it was answered by a ragged dirty waiter, andthey asked him to bring tea which was served at last, but in sucha dirty and disorderly way that the ladies were ashamed. Razumihinvigorously attacked the lodgings, but, remembering Luzhin, stoppedin embarrassment and was greatly relieved by Pulcheria Alexandrovna’squestions, which showered in a continual stream upon him.
He talked for three quarters of an hour, being constantly interruptedby their questions, and succeeded in describing to them all themost important facts he knew of the last year of Raskolnikov’s life,concluding with a circumstantial account of his illness. He omitted,however, many things, which were better omitted, including the scene atthe police station with all its consequences. They listened eagerlyto his story, and, when he thought he had finished and satisfied hislisteners, he found that they considered he had hardly begun.
“Tell me, tell me! What do you think...? Excuse me, I still don’t knowyour name!” Pulcheria Alexandrovna put in hastily.
“Dmitri Prokofitch.”
“I should like very, very much to know, Dmitri Prokofitch... how helooks... on things in general now, that is, how can I explain, what arehis likes and dislikes? Is he always so irritable? Tell me, if you can,what are his hopes and, so to say, his dreams? Under what influences ishe now? In a word, I should like...”
“Ah, mother, how can he answer all that at once?” observed Dounia.
“Good heavens, I had not expected to find him in the least like this,Dmitri Prokofitch!”
“Naturally,” answered Razumihin. “I have no mother, but my uncle comesevery year and almost every time he can scarcely recognise me, even inappearance, though he is a clever man; and your three years’ separationmeans a great deal. What am I to tell you? I have known Rodion fora year and a half; he is morose, gloomy, proud and haughty, and oflate--and perhaps for a long time before--he has been suspicious andfanciful. He has a noble nature and a kind heart. He does not likeshowing his feelings and would rather do a cruel thing than open hisheart freely. Sometimes, though, he is not at all morbid, but simplycold and inhumanly callous; it’s as though he were alternating betweentwo characters. Sometimes he is fearfully reserved! He says he isso busy that everything is a hindrance, and yet he lies in bed doingnothing. He doesn’t jeer at things, not because he hasn’t the wit, butas though he hadn’t time to waste on such trifles. He never listensto what is said to him. He is never interested in what interests otherpeople at any given moment. He thinks very highly of himself and perhapshe is right. Well, what more? I think your arrival will have a mostbeneficial influence upon him.”
“God grant it may,” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna, distressed byRazumihin’s account of her Rodya.
And Razumihin ventured to look more boldly at Avdotya Romanovna at last.He glanced at her often while he was talking, but only for a moment andlooked away again at once. Avdotya Romanovna sat at the table, listeningattentively, then got up again and began walking to and fro with herarms folded and her lips compressed, occasionally putting in a question,without stopping her walk. She had the same habit of not listening towhat was said. She was wearing a dress of thin dark stuff and she had awhite transparent scarf round her neck. Razumihin soon detected signs ofextreme poverty in their belongings. Had Avdotya Romanovna been dressedlike a queen, he felt that he would not be afraid of her, but perhapsjust because she was poorly dressed and that he noticed all the miseryof her surroundings, his heart was filled with dread and he began to beafraid of every word he uttered, every gesture he made, which was verytrying for a man who already felt diffident.
“You’ve told us a great deal that is interesting about my brother’scharacter... and have told it impartially. I am glad. I thought that youwere too uncritically devoted to him,” observed Avdotya Romanovna witha smile. “I think you are right that he needs a woman’s care,” she addedthoughtfully.
“I didn’t say so; but I daresay you are right, only...”
“What?”
“He loves no one and perhaps he never will,” Razumihin declareddecisively.
“You mean he is not capable of love?”
“Do you know, Avdotya Romanovna, you are awfully like your brother, ineverything, indeed!” he blurted out suddenly to his own surprise, butremembering at once what he had just before said of her brother,he turned as red as a crab and was overcome with confusion. AvdotyaRomanovna couldn’t help laughing when she looked at him.
“You may both be mistaken about Rodya,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna remarked,slightly piqued. “I am not talking of our present difficulty, Dounia.What Pyotr Petrovitch writes in this letter and what you and I havesupposed may be mistaken, but you can’t imagine, Dmitri Prokofitch, howmoody and, so to say, capricious he is. I never could depend on whathe would do when he was only fifteen. And I am sure that he mightdo something now that nobody else would think of doing... Well, forinstance, do you know how a year and a half ago he astounded me and gaveme a shock that nearly killed me, when he had the idea of marrying thatgirl--what was her name--his landlady’s daughter?”
“Did you hear about that affair?” asked Avdotya Romanovna.
“Do you suppose----” Pulcheria Alexandrovna continued warmly. “Do yousuppose that my tears, my entreaties, my illness, my possible death fromgrief, our poverty would have made him pause? No, he would calmly havedisregarded all obstacles. And yet it isn’t that he doesn’t love us!”
“He has never spoken a word of that affair to me,” Razumihin answeredcautiously. “But I did hear something from Praskovya Pavlovna herself,though she is by no means a gossip. And what I heard certainly wasrather strange.”
“And what did you hear?” both the ladies asked at once.
“Well, nothing very special. I only learned that the marriage, whichonly failed to take place through the girl’s death, was not at all toPraskovya Pavlovna’s liking. They say, too, the girl was not at allpretty, in fact I am told positively ugly... and such an invalid... andqueer. But she seems to have had some good qualities. She must havehad some good qualities or it’s quite inexplicable.... She had no moneyeither and he wouldn’t have considered her money.... But it’s alwaysdifficult to judge in such matters.”
“I am sure she was a good girl,” Avdotya Romanovna observed briefly.
“God forgive me, I simply rejoiced at her death. Though I don’t knowwhich of them would have caused most misery to the other--he to heror she to him,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna concluded. Then she begantentatively questioning him about the scene on the previous day withLuzhin, hesitating and continually glancing at Dounia, obviously tothe latter’s annoyance. This incident more than all the rest evidentlycaused her uneasiness, even consternation. Razumihin described it indetail again, but this time he added his own conclusions: he openlyblamed Raskolnikov for intentionally insulting Pyotr Petrovitch, notseeking to excuse him on the score of his illness.
“He had planned it before his illness,” he added.
“I think so, too,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna agreed with a dejected air.But she was very much surprised at hearing Razumihin express himselfso carefully and even with a certain respect about Pyotr Petrovitch.Avdotya Romanovna, too, was struck by it.
“So this is your opinion of Pyotr Petrovitch?” Pulcheria Alexandrovnacould not resist asking.
“I can have no other opinion of your daughter’s future husband,”Razumihin answered firmly and with warmth, “and I don’t say it simplyfrom vulgar politeness, but because... simply because Avdotya Romanovnahas of her own free will deigned to accept this man. If I spoke sorudely of him last night, it was because I was disgustingly drunk and...mad besides; yes, mad, crazy, I lost my head completely... and thismorning I am ashamed of it.”
He crimsoned and ceased speaking. Avdotya Romanovna flushed, but did notbreak the silence. She had not uttered a word from the moment they beganto speak of Luzhin.
Without her support Pulcheria Alexandrovna obviously did not know whatto do. At last, faltering and continually glancing at her daughter, sheconfessed that she was exceedingly worried by one circumstance.
“You see, Dmitri Prokofitch,” she began. “I’ll be perfectly open withDmitri Prokofitch, Dounia?”
“Of course, mother,” said Avdotya Romanovna emphatically.
“This is what it is,” she began in haste, as though the permission tospeak of her trouble lifted a weight off her mind. “Very early thismorning we got a note from Pyotr Petrovitch in reply to our letterannouncing our arrival. He promised to meet us at the station, youknow; instead of that he sent a servant to bring us the address of theselodgings and to show us the way; and he sent a message that he wouldbe here himself this morning. But this morning this note came from him.You’d better read it yourself; there is one point in it which worries mevery much... you will soon see what that is, and... tell me your candidopinion, Dmitri Prokofitch! You know Rodya’s character better thananyone and no one can advise us better than you can. Dounia, I must tellyou, made her decision at once, but I still don’t feel sure how to actand I... I’ve been waiting for your opinion.”
Razumihin opened the note which was dated the previous evening and readas follows:
“Dear Madam, Pulcheria Alexandrovna, I have the honour to inform youthat owing to unforeseen obstacles I was rendered unable to meet you atthe railway station; I sent a very competent person with the same objectin view. I likewise shall be deprived of the honour of an interview withyou to-morrow morning by business in the Senate that does not admit ofdelay, and also that I may not intrude on your family circle while youare meeting your son, and Avdotya Romanovna her brother. I shall havethe honour of visiting you and paying you my respects at your lodgingsnot later than to-morrow evening at eight o’clock precisely, andherewith I venture to present my earnest and, I may add, imperativerequest that Rodion Romanovitch may not be present at our interview--ashe offered me a gross and unprecedented affront on the occasion of myvisit to him in his illness yesterday, and, moreover, since I desirefrom you personally an indispensable and circumstantial explanationupon a certain point, in regard to which I wish to learn your owninterpretation. I have the honour to inform you, in anticipation,that if, in spite of my request, I meet Rodion Romanovitch, I shall becompelled to withdraw immediately and then you have only yourself toblame. I write on the assumption that Rodion Romanovitch who appeared soill at my visit, suddenly recovered two hours later and so, being ableto leave the house, may visit you also. I was confirmed in that beliefby the testimony of my own eyes in the lodging of a drunken man whowas run over and has since died, to whose daughter, a young woman ofnotorious behaviour, he gave twenty-five roubles on the pretext of thefuneral, which gravely surprised me knowing what pains you were at toraise that sum. Herewith expressing my special respect to your estimabledaughter, Avdotya Romanovna, I beg you to accept the respectful homageof
“Your humble servant,
“P. LUZHIN.”
“What am I to do now, Dmitri Prokofitch?” began Pulcheria Alexandrovna,almost weeping. “How can I ask Rodya not to come? Yesterday he insistedso earnestly on our refusing Pyotr Petrovitch and now we are ordered notto receive Rodya! He will come on purpose if he knows, and... what willhappen then?”
“Act on Avdotya Romanovna’s decision,” Razumihin answered calmly atonce.
“Oh, dear me! She says... goodness knows what she says, she doesn’texplain her object! She says that it would be best, at least, not thatit would be best, but that it’s absolutely necessary that Rodya shouldmake a point of being here at eight o’clock and that they must meet....I didn’t want even to show him the letter, but to prevent himfrom coming by some stratagem with your help... because he is soirritable.... Besides I don’t understand about that drunkard who diedand that daughter, and how he could have given the daughter all themoney... which...”
“Which cost you such sacrifice, mother,” put in Avdotya Romanovna.
“He was not himself yesterday,” Razumihin said thoughtfully, “if youonly knew what he was up to in a restaurant yesterday, though therewas sense in it too.... Hm! He did say something, as we were going homeyesterday evening, about a dead man and a girl, but I didn’t understanda word.... But last night, I myself...”
“The best thing, mother, will be for us to go to him ourselves andthere I assure you we shall see at once what’s to be done. Besides,it’s getting late--good heavens, it’s past ten,” she cried looking ata splendid gold enamelled watch which hung round her neck on a thinVenetian chain, and looked entirely out of keeping with the rest of herdress. “A present from her _fiancé_,” thought Razumihin.
“We must start, Dounia, we must start,” her mother cried in a flutter.“He will be thinking we are still angry after yesterday, from our comingso late. Merciful heavens!”
While she said this she was hurriedly putting on her hat and mantle;Dounia, too, put on her things. Her gloves, as Razumihin noticed, werenot merely shabby but had holes in them, and yet this evident povertygave the two ladies an air of special dignity, which is always found inpeople who know how to wear poor clothes. Razumihin looked reverentlyat Dounia and felt proud of escorting her. “The queen who mended herstockings in prison,” he thought, “must have looked then every inch aqueen and even more a queen than at sumptuous banquets and levées.”
“My God!” exclaimed Pulcheria Alexandrovna, “little did I think that Ishould ever fear seeing my son, my darling, darling Rodya! I am afraid,Dmitri Prokofitch,” she added, glancing at him timidly.
“Don’t be afraid, mother,” said Dounia, kissing her, “better have faithin him.”
“Oh, dear, I have faith in him, but I haven’t slept all night,”exclaimed the poor woman.
They came out into the street.
“Do you know, Dounia, when I dozed a little this morning I dreamed ofMarfa Petrovna... she was all in white... she came up to me, tookmy hand, and shook her head at me, but so sternly as though she wereblaming me.... Is that a good omen? Oh, dear me! You don’t know, DmitriProkofitch, that Marfa Petrovna’s dead!”
“No, I didn’t know; who is Marfa Petrovna?”
“She died suddenly; and only fancy...”
“Afterwards, mamma,” put in Dounia. “He doesn’t know who Marfa Petrovnais.”
“Ah, you don’t know? And I was thinking that you knew all about us.Forgive me, Dmitri Prokofitch, I don’t know what I am thinking aboutthese last few days. I look upon you really as a providence for us, andso I took it for granted that you knew all about us. I look on you as arelation.... Don’t be angry with me for saying so. Dear me, what’s thematter with your right hand? Have you knocked it?”
“Yes, I bruised it,” muttered Razumihin overjoyed.
“I sometimes speak too much from the heart, so that Dounia finds faultwith me.... But, dear me, what a cupboard he lives in! I wonder whetherhe is awake? Does this woman, his landlady, consider it a room? Listen,you say he does not like to show his feelings, so perhaps I shall annoyhim with my... weaknesses? Do advise me, Dmitri Prokofitch, how am I totreat him? I feel quite distracted, you know.”
“Don’t question him too much about anything if you see him frown; don’task him too much about his health; he doesn’t like that.”
“Ah, Dmitri Prokofitch, how hard it is to be a mother! But here are thestairs.... What an awful staircase!”
“Mother, you are quite pale, don’t distress yourself, darling,” saidDounia caressing her, then with flashing eyes she added: “He ought to behappy at seeing you, and you are tormenting yourself so.”
“Wait, I’ll peep in and see whether he has waked up.”
The ladies slowly followed Razumihin, who went on before, and when theyreached the landlady’s door on the fourth storey, they noticed that herdoor was a tiny crack open and that two keen black eyes were watchingthem from the darkness within. When their eyes met, the door wassuddenly shut with such a slam that Pulcheria Alexandrovna almost criedout.
CHAPTER III
“He is well, quite well!” Zossimov cried cheerfully as they entered.
He had come in ten minutes earlier and was sitting in the same placeas before, on the sofa. Raskolnikov was sitting in the opposite corner,fully dressed and carefully washed and combed, as he had not been forsome time past. The room was immediately crowded, yet Nastasya managedto follow the visitors in and stayed to listen.
Raskolnikov really was almost well, as compared with his condition theday before, but he was still pale, listless, and sombre. He looked likea wounded man or one who has undergone some terrible physical suffering.His brows were knitted, his lips compressed, his eyes feverish. He spokelittle and reluctantly, as though performing a duty, and there was arestlessness in his movements.
He only wanted a sling on his arm or a bandage on his finger to completethe impression of a man with a painful abscess or a broken arm. Thepale, sombre face lighted up for a moment when his mother and sisterentered, but this only gave it a look of more intense suffering, inplace of its listless dejection. The light soon died away, but the lookof suffering remained, and Zossimov, watching and studying his patientwith all the zest of a young doctor beginning to practise, noticedin him no joy at the arrival of his mother and sister, but a sort ofbitter, hidden determination to bear another hour or two of inevitabletorture. He saw later that almost every word of the followingconversation seemed to touch on some sore place and irritate it. Butat the same time he marvelled at the power of controlling himselfand hiding his feelings in a patient who the previous day had, like amonomaniac, fallen into a frenzy at the slightest word.
“Yes, I see myself now that I am almost well,” said Raskolnikov,giving his mother and sister a kiss of welcome which made PulcheriaAlexandrovna radiant at once. “And I don’t say this _as I didyesterday_,” he said, addressing Razumihin, with a friendly pressure ofhis hand.
“Yes, indeed, I am quite surprised at him to-day,” began Zossimov, muchdelighted at the ladies’ entrance, for he had not succeeded in keepingup a conversation with his patient for ten minutes. “In another three orfour days, if he goes on like this, he will be just as before, that is,as he was a month ago, or two... or perhaps even three. This has beencoming on for a long while.... eh? Confess, now, that it has beenperhaps your own fault?” he added, with a tentative smile, as thoughstill afraid of irritating him.
“It is very possible,” answered Raskolnikov coldly.
“I should say, too,” continued Zossimov with zest, “that your completerecovery depends solely on yourself. Now that one can talk to you,I should like to impress upon you that it is essential to avoid theelementary, so to speak, fundamental causes tending to produce yourmorbid condition: in that case you will be cured, if not, it will gofrom bad to worse. These fundamental causes I don’t know, but they mustbe known to you. You are an intelligent man, and must have observedyourself, of course. I fancy the first stage of your derangementcoincides with your leaving the university. You must not be left withoutoccupation, and so, work and a definite aim set before you might, Ifancy, be very beneficial.”
“Yes, yes; you are perfectly right.... I will make haste and return tothe university: and then everything will go smoothly....”
Zossimov, who had begun his sage advice partly to make an effect beforethe ladies, was certainly somewhat mystified, when, glancing at hispatient, he observed unmistakable mockery on his face. This lastedan instant, however. Pulcheria Alexandrovna began at once thankingZossimov, especially for his visit to their lodging the previous night.
“What! he saw you last night?” Raskolnikov asked, as though startled.“Then you have not slept either after your journey.”
“Ach, Rodya, that was only till two o’clock. Dounia and I never go tobed before two at home.”
“I don’t know how to thank him either,” Raskolnikov went on,suddenly frowning and looking down. “Setting aside the question ofpayment--forgive me for referring to it (he turned to Zossimov)--Ireally don’t know what I have done to deserve such special attentionfrom you! I simply don’t understand it... and... and... it weighs uponme, indeed, because I don’t understand it. I tell you so candidly.”
“Don’t be irritated.” Zossimov forced himself to laugh. “Assume that youare my first patient--well--we fellows just beginning to practise loveour first patients as if they were our children, and some almost fall inlove with them. And, of course, I am not rich in patients.”
“I say nothing about him,” added Raskolnikov, pointing to Razumihin,“though he has had nothing from me either but insult and trouble.”
“What nonsense he is talking! Why, you are in a sentimental mood to-day,are you?” shouted Razumihin.
If he had had more penetration he would have seen that there was notrace of sentimentality in him, but something indeed quite the opposite.But Avdotya Romanovna noticed it. She was intently and uneasily watchingher brother.
“As for you, mother, I don’t dare to speak,” he went on, as thoughrepeating a lesson learned by heart. “It is only to-day that I havebeen able to realise a little how distressed you must have been hereyesterday, waiting for me to come back.”
When he had said this, he suddenly held out his hand to his sister,smiling without a word. But in this smile there was a flash of realunfeigned feeling. Dounia caught it at once, and warmly pressed hishand, overjoyed and thankful. It was the first time he had addressed hersince their dispute the previous day. The mother’s face lighted upwith ecstatic happiness at the sight of this conclusive unspokenreconciliation. “Yes, that is what I love him for,” Razumihin,exaggerating it all, muttered to himself, with a vigorous turn in hischair. “He has these movements.”
“And how well he does it all,” the mother was thinking to herself. “Whatgenerous impulses he has, and how simply, how delicately he put an endto all the misunderstanding with his sister--simply by holding out hishand at the right minute and looking at her like that.... And whatfine eyes he has, and how fine his whole face is!... He is even betterlooking than Dounia.... But, good heavens, what a suit--how terriblyhe’s dressed!... Vasya, the messenger boy in Afanasy Ivanitch’s shop, isbetter dressed! I could rush at him and hug him... weep over him--butI am afraid.... Oh, dear, he’s so strange! He’s talking kindly, but I’mafraid! Why, what am I afraid of?...”
“Oh, Rodya, you wouldn’t believe,” she began suddenly, in haste toanswer his words to her, “how unhappy Dounia and I were yesterday! Nowthat it’s all over and done with and we are quite happy again--I cantell you. Fancy, we ran here almost straight from the train to embraceyou and that woman--ah, here she is! Good morning, Nastasya!... She toldus at once that you were lying in a high fever and had just run awayfrom the doctor in delirium, and they were looking for you in thestreets. You can’t imagine how we felt! I couldn’t help thinking of thetragic end of Lieutenant Potanchikov, a friend of your father’s--youcan’t remember him, Rodya--who ran out in the same way in a high feverand fell into the well in the court-yard and they couldn’t pull him outtill next day. Of course, we exaggerated things. We were on the point ofrushing to find Pyotr Petrovitch to ask him to help.... Because we werealone, utterly alone,” she said plaintively and stopped short,suddenly, recollecting it was still somewhat dangerous to speak of PyotrPetrovitch, although “we are quite happy again.”
“Yes, yes.... Of course it’s very annoying....” Raskolnikov muttered inreply, but with such a preoccupied and inattentive air that Dounia gazedat him in perplexity.
“What else was it I wanted to say?” He went on trying to recollect. “Oh,yes; mother, and you too, Dounia, please don’t think that I didn’t meanto come and see you to-day and was waiting for you to come first.”
“What are you saying, Rodya?” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. She, too,was surprised.
“Is he answering us as a duty?” Dounia wondered. “Is he being reconciledand asking forgiveness as though he were performing a rite or repeatinga lesson?”
“I’ve only just waked up, and wanted to go to you, but was delayed owingto my clothes; I forgot yesterday to ask her... Nastasya... to wash outthe blood... I’ve only just dressed.”
“Blood! What blood?” Pulcheria Alexandrovna asked in alarm.
“Oh, nothing--don’t be uneasy. It was when I was wandering aboutyesterday, rather delirious, I chanced upon a man who had been runover... a clerk...”
“Delirious? But you remember everything!” Razumihin interrupted.
“That’s true,” Raskolnikov answered with special carefulness. “Iremember everything even to the slightest detail, and yet--why I didthat and went there and said that, I can’t clearly explain now.”
“A familiar phenomenon,” interposed Zossimov, “actions are sometimesperformed in a masterly and most cunning way, while the direction of theactions is deranged and dependent on various morbid impressions--it’slike a dream.”
“Perhaps it’s a good thing really that he should think me almost amadman,” thought Raskolnikov.
“Why, people in perfect health act in the same way too,” observedDounia, looking uneasily at Zossimov.
“There is some truth in your observation,” the latter replied. “In thatsense we are certainly all not infrequently like madmen, but with theslight difference that the deranged are somewhat madder, for wemust draw a line. A normal man, it is true, hardly exists. Amongdozens--perhaps hundreds of thousands--hardly one is to be met with.”
At the word “madman,” carelessly dropped by Zossimov in his chatter onhis favourite subject, everyone frowned.
Raskolnikov sat seeming not to pay attention, plunged in thought with astrange smile on his pale lips. He was still meditating on something.
“Well, what about the man who was run over? I interrupted you!”Razumihin cried hastily.
“What?” Raskolnikov seemed to wake up. “Oh... I got spattered withblood helping to carry him to his lodging. By the way, mamma, I did anunpardonable thing yesterday. I was literally out of my mind. I gaveaway all the money you sent me... to his wife for the funeral. She’sa widow now, in consumption, a poor creature... three little children,starving... nothing in the house... there’s a daughter, too... perhapsyou’d have given it yourself if you’d seen them. But I had no right todo it I admit, especially as I knew how you needed the money yourself.To help others one must have the right to do it, or else _Crevez,chiens, si vous n’êtes pas contents_.” He laughed, “That’s right, isn’tit, Dounia?”
“No, it’s not,” answered Dounia firmly.
“Bah! you, too, have ideals,” he muttered, looking at her almost withhatred, and smiling sarcastically. “I ought to have considered that....Well, that’s praiseworthy, and it’s better for you... and if you reach aline you won’t overstep, you will be unhappy... and if you overstep it,maybe you will be still unhappier.... But all that’s nonsense,” he addedirritably, vexed at being carried away. “I only meant to say that I begyour forgiveness, mother,” he concluded, shortly and abruptly.
“That’s enough, Rodya, I am sure that everything you do is very good,”said his mother, delighted.
“Don’t be too sure,” he answered, twisting his mouth into a smile.
A silence followed. There was a certain constraint in all thisconversation, and in the silence, and in the reconciliation, and in theforgiveness, and all were feeling it.
“It is as though they were afraid of me,” Raskolnikov was thinkingto himself, looking askance at his mother and sister. PulcheriaAlexandrovna was indeed growing more timid the longer she kept silent.
“Yet in their absence I seemed to love them so much,” flashed throughhis mind.
“Do you know, Rodya, Marfa Petrovna is dead,” Pulcheria Alexandrovnasuddenly blurted out.
“What Marfa Petrovna?”
“Oh, mercy on us--Marfa Petrovna Svidrigaïlov. I wrote you so much abouther.”
“A-a-h! Yes, I remember.... So she’s dead! Oh, really?” he rousedhimself suddenly, as if waking up. “What did she die of?”
“Only imagine, quite suddenly,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna answeredhurriedly, encouraged by his curiosity. “On the very day I was sendingyou that letter! Would you believe it, that awful man seems to have beenthe cause of her death. They say he beat her dreadfully.”
“Why, were they on such bad terms?” he asked, addressing his sister.
“Not at all. Quite the contrary indeed. With her, he was always verypatient, considerate even. In fact, all those seven years of theirmarried life he gave way to her, too much so indeed, in many cases. Allof a sudden he seems to have lost patience.”
“Then he could not have been so awful if he controlled himself for sevenyears? You seem to be defending him, Dounia?”
“No, no, he’s an awful man! I can imagine nothing more awful!” Douniaanswered, almost with a shudder, knitting her brows, and sinking intothought.
“That had happened in the morning,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna went onhurriedly. “And directly afterwards she ordered the horses to beharnessed to drive to the town immediately after dinner. She always usedto drive to the town in such cases. She ate a very good dinner, I amtold....”
“After the beating?”
“That was always her... habit; and immediately after dinner, so as notto be late in starting, she went to the bath-house.... You see, she wasundergoing some treatment with baths. They have a cold spring there, andshe used to bathe in it regularly every day, and no sooner had she gotinto the water when she suddenly had a stroke!”
“I should think so,” said Zossimov.
“And did he beat her badly?”
“What does that matter!” put in Dounia.
“H’m! But I don’t know why you want to tell us such gossip, mother,”said Raskolnikov irritably, as it were in spite of himself.
“Ah, my dear, I don’t know what to talk about,” broke from PulcheriaAlexandrovna.
“Why, are you all afraid of me?” he asked, with a constrained smile.
“That’s certainly true,” said Dounia, looking directly and sternly ather brother. “Mother was crossing herself with terror as she came up thestairs.”
His face worked, as though in convulsion.
“Ach, what are you saying, Dounia! Don’t be angry, please, Rodya....Why did you say that, Dounia?” Pulcheria Alexandrovna began,overwhelmed--“You see, coming here, I was dreaming all the way, in thetrain, how we should meet, how we should talk over everythingtogether.... And I was so happy, I did not notice the journey! But whatam I saying? I am happy now.... You should not, Dounia.... I am happynow--simply in seeing you, Rodya....”
“Hush, mother,” he muttered in confusion, not looking at her, butpressing her hand. “We shall have time to speak freely of everything!”
As he said this, he was suddenly overwhelmed with confusion and turnedpale. Again that awful sensation he had known of late passed with deadlychill over his soul. Again it became suddenly plain and perceptible tohim that he had just told a fearful lie--that he would never now beable to speak freely of everything--that he would never again be able to_speak_ of anything to anyone. The anguish of this thought was such thatfor a moment he almost forgot himself. He got up from his seat, and notlooking at anyone walked towards the door.
“What are you about?” cried Razumihin, clutching him by the arm.
He sat down again, and began looking about him, in silence. They wereall looking at him in perplexity.
“But what are you all so dull for?” he shouted, suddenly and quiteunexpectedly. “Do say something! What’s the use of sitting like this?Come, do speak. Let us talk.... We meet together and sit in silence....Come, anything!”
“Thank God; I was afraid the same thing as yesterday was beginningagain,” said Pulcheria Alexandrovna, crossing herself.
“What is the matter, Rodya?” asked Avdotya Romanovna, distrustfully.
“Oh, nothing! I remembered something,” he answered, and suddenlylaughed.
“Well, if you remembered something; that’s all right!... I was beginningto think...” muttered Zossimov, getting up from the sofa. “It is timefor me to be off. I will look in again perhaps... if I can...” He madehis bows, and went out.
“What an excellent man!” observed Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
“Yes, excellent, splendid, well-educated, intelligent,” Raskolnikovbegan, suddenly speaking with surprising rapidity, and a liveliness hehad not shown till then. “I can’t remember where I met him before myillness.... I believe I have met him somewhere----... And this is a goodman, too,” he nodded at Razumihin. “Do you like him, Dounia?” he askedher; and suddenly, for some unknown reason, laughed.
“Very much,” answered Dounia.
“Foo!--what a pig you are!” Razumihin protested, blushing in terribleconfusion, and he got up from his chair. Pulcheria Alexandrovna smiledfaintly, but Raskolnikov laughed aloud.
“Where are you off to?”
“I must go.”
“You need not at all. Stay. Zossimov has gone, so you must. Don’t go.What’s the time? Is it twelve o’clock? What a pretty watch you have got,Dounia. But why are you all silent again? I do all the talking.”
“It was a present from Marfa Petrovna,” answered Dounia.
“And a very expensive one!” added Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
“A-ah! What a big one! Hardly like a lady’s.”
“I like that sort,” said Dounia.
“So it is not a present from her _fiancé_,” thought Razumihin, and wasunreasonably delighted.
“I thought it was Luzhin’s present,” observed Raskolnikov.
“No, he has not made Dounia any presents yet.”
“A-ah! And do you remember, mother, I was in love and wanted to getmarried?” he said suddenly, looking at his mother, who was disconcertedby the sudden change of subject and the way he spoke of it.
“Oh, yes, my dear.”
Pulcheria Alexandrovna exchanged glances with Dounia and Razumihin.
“H’m, yes. What shall I tell you? I don’t remember much indeed. She wassuch a sickly girl,” he went on, growing dreamy and looking down again.“Quite an invalid. She was fond of giving alms to the poor, and wasalways dreaming of a nunnery, and once she burst into tears when shebegan talking to me about it. Yes, yes, I remember. I remember verywell. She was an ugly little thing. I really don’t know what drew meto her then--I think it was because she was always ill. If she had beenlame or hunchback, I believe I should have liked her better still,” hesmiled dreamily. “Yes, it was a sort of spring delirium.”
“No, it was not only spring delirium,” said Dounia, with warm feeling.
He fixed a strained intent look on his sister, but did not hear or didnot understand her words. Then, completely lost in thought, he got up,went up to his mother, kissed her, went back to his place and sat down.
“You love her even now?” said Pulcheria Alexandrovna, touched.
“Her? Now? Oh, yes.... You ask about her? No... that’s all now, asit were, in another world... and so long ago. And indeed everythinghappening here seems somehow far away.” He looked attentively at them.“You, now... I seem to be looking at you from a thousand miles away...but, goodness knows why we are talking of that! And what’s the use ofasking about it?” he added with annoyance, and biting his nails, fellinto dreamy silence again.
“What a wretched lodging you have, Rodya! It’s like a tomb,” saidPulcheria Alexandrovna, suddenly breaking the oppressive silence. “Iam sure it’s quite half through your lodging you have become somelancholy.”
“My lodging,” he answered, listlessly. “Yes, the lodging had a greatdeal to do with it.... I thought that, too.... If only you knew, though,what a strange thing you said just now, mother,” he said, laughingstrangely.
A little more, and their companionship, this mother and this sister,with him after three years’ absence, this intimate tone of conversation,in face of the utter impossibility of really speaking about anything,would have been beyond his power of endurance. But there was one urgentmatter which must be settled one way or the other that day--so he haddecided when he woke. Now he was glad to remember it, as a means ofescape.
“Listen, Dounia,” he began, gravely and drily, “of course I beg yourpardon for yesterday, but I consider it my duty to tell you again thatI do not withdraw from my chief point. It is me or Luzhin. If I am ascoundrel, you must not be. One is enough. If you marry Luzhin, I ceaseat once to look on you as a sister.”
“Rodya, Rodya! It is the same as yesterday again,” PulcheriaAlexandrovna cried, mournfully. “And why do you call yourself ascoundrel? I can’t bear it. You said the same yesterday.”
“Brother,” Dounia answered firmly and with the same dryness. “In allthis there is a mistake on your part. I thought it over at night,and found out the mistake. It is all because you seem to fancy I amsacrificing myself to someone and for someone. That is not the case atall. I am simply marrying for my own sake, because things are hard forme. Though, of course, I shall be glad if I succeed in being useful tomy family. But that is not the chief motive for my decision....”
“She is lying,” he thought to himself, biting his nails vindictively.“Proud creature! She won’t admit she wants to do it out of charity! Toohaughty! Oh, base characters! They even love as though they hate.... Oh,how I... hate them all!”
“In fact,” continued Dounia, “I am marrying Pyotr Petrovitch because oftwo evils I choose the less. I intend to do honestly all he expects ofme, so I am not deceiving him.... Why did you smile just now?” She, too,flushed, and there was a gleam of anger in her eyes.
“All?” he asked, with a malignant grin.
“Within certain limits. Both the manner and form of Pyotr Petrovitch’scourtship showed me at once what he wanted. He may, of course, think toowell of himself, but I hope he esteems me, too.... Why are you laughingagain?”
“And why are you blushing again? You are lying, sister. You areintentionally lying, simply from feminine obstinacy, simply to hold yourown against me.... You cannot respect Luzhin. I have seen him and talkedwith him. So you are selling yourself for money, and so in any case youare acting basely, and I am glad at least that you can blush for it.”
“It is not true. I am not lying,” cried Dounia, losing her composure.“I would not marry him if I were not convinced that he esteems meand thinks highly of me. I would not marry him if I were not firmlyconvinced that I can respect him. Fortunately, I can have convincingproof of it this very day... and such a marriage is not a vileness, asyou say! And even if you were right, if I really had determined on avile action, is it not merciless on your part to speak to me like that?Why do you demand of me a heroism that perhaps you have not either? Itis despotism; it is tyranny. If I ruin anyone, it is only myself.... Iam not committing a murder. Why do you look at me like that? Why are youso pale? Rodya, darling, what’s the matter?”
“Good heavens! You have made him faint,” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
“No, no, nonsense! It’s nothing. A little giddiness--not fainting. Youhave fainting on the brain. H’m, yes, what was I saying? Oh, yes. Inwhat way will you get convincing proof to-day that you can respect him,and that he... esteems you, as you said. I think you said to-day?”
“Mother, show Rodya Pyotr Petrovitch’s letter,” said Dounia.
With trembling hands, Pulcheria Alexandrovna gave him the letter. Hetook it with great interest, but, before opening it, he suddenly lookedwith a sort of wonder at Dounia.
“It is strange,” he said, slowly, as though struck by a new idea. “Whatam I making such a fuss for? What is it all about? Marry whom you like!”
He said this as though to himself, but said it aloud, and looked forsome time at his sister, as though puzzled. He opened the letter atlast, still with the same look of strange wonder on his face. Then,slowly and attentively, he began reading, and read it through twice.Pulcheria Alexandrovna showed marked anxiety, and all indeed expectedsomething particular.
“What surprises me,” he began, after a short pause, handing the letterto his mother, but not addressing anyone in particular, “is that he is abusiness man, a lawyer, and his conversation is pretentious indeed, andyet he writes such an uneducated letter.”
They all started. They had expected something quite different.
“But they all write like that, you know,” Razumihin observed, abruptly.
“Have you read it?”
“Yes.”
“We showed him, Rodya. We... consulted him just now,” PulcheriaAlexandrovna began, embarrassed.
“That’s just the jargon of the courts,” Razumihin put in. “Legaldocuments are written like that to this day.”
“Legal? Yes, it’s just legal--business language--not so very uneducated,and not quite educated--business language!”
“Pyotr Petrovitch makes no secret of the fact that he had a cheapeducation, he is proud indeed of having made his own way,” AvdotyaRomanovna observed, somewhat offended by her brother’s tone.
“Well, if he’s proud of it, he has reason, I don’t deny it. You seem tobe offended, sister, at my making only such a frivolous criticism on theletter, and to think that I speak of such trifling matters on purpose toannoy you. It is quite the contrary, an observation apropos of the styleoccurred to me that is by no means irrelevant as things stand. Thereis one expression, ‘blame yourselves’ put in very significantly andplainly, and there is besides a threat that he will go away at once if Iam present. That threat to go away is equivalent to a threat to abandonyou both if you are disobedient, and to abandon you now after summoningyou to Petersburg. Well, what do you think? Can one resent such anexpression from Luzhin, as we should if he (he pointed to Razumihin) hadwritten it, or Zossimov, or one of us?”
“N-no,” answered Dounia, with more animation. “I saw clearly that itwas too naïvely expressed, and that perhaps he simply has no skillin writing... that is a true criticism, brother. I did not expect,indeed...”
“It is expressed in legal style, and sounds coarser than perhaps heintended. But I must disillusion you a little. There is one expressionin the letter, one slander about me, and rather a contemptible one. Igave the money last night to the widow, a woman in consumption, crushedwith trouble, and not ‘on the pretext of the funeral,’ but simply to payfor the funeral, and not to the daughter--a young woman, as he writes,of notorious behaviour (whom I saw last night for the first time in mylife)--but to the widow. In all this I see a too hasty desire to slanderme and to raise dissension between us. It is expressed again in legaljargon, that is to say, with a too obvious display of the aim, andwith a very naïve eagerness. He is a man of intelligence, but to actsensibly, intelligence is not enough. It all shows the man and... Idon’t think he has a great esteem for you. I tell you this simply towarn you, because I sincerely wish for your good...”
Dounia did not reply. Her resolution had been taken. She was onlyawaiting the evening.
“Then what is your decision, Rodya?” asked Pulcheria Alexandrovna, whowas more uneasy than ever at the sudden, new businesslike tone of histalk.
“What decision?”
“You see Pyotr Petrovitch writes that you are not to be with us thisevening, and that he will go away if you come. So will you... come?”
“That, of course, is not for me to decide, but for you first, if you arenot offended by such a request; and secondly, by Dounia, if she, too, isnot offended. I will do what you think best,” he added, drily.
“Dounia has already decided, and I fully agree with her,” PulcheriaAlexandrovna hastened to declare.
“I decided to ask you, Rodya, to urge you not to fail to be with us atthis interview,” said Dounia. “Will you come?”
“Yes.”
“I will ask you, too, to be with us at eight o’clock,” she said,addressing Razumihin. “Mother, I am inviting him, too.”
“Quite right, Dounia. Well, since you have decided,” added PulcheriaAlexandrovna, “so be it. I shall feel easier myself. I do not likeconcealment and deception. Better let us have the whole truth.... PyotrPetrovitch may be angry or not, now!”
CHAPTER IV
At that moment the door was softly opened, and a young girl walked intothe room, looking timidly about her. Everyone turned towards her withsurprise and curiosity. At first sight, Raskolnikov did not recogniseher. It was Sofya Semyonovna Marmeladov. He had seen her yesterday forthe first time, but at such a moment, in such surroundings and in sucha dress, that his memory retained a very different image of her. Now shewas a modestly and poorly-dressed young girl, very young, indeed,almost like a child, with a modest and refined manner, with a candid butsomewhat frightened-looking face. She was wearing a very plain indoordress, and had on a shabby old-fashioned hat, but she still carried aparasol. Unexpectedly finding the room full of people, she was not somuch embarrassed as completely overwhelmed with shyness, like alittle child. She was even about to retreat. “Oh... it’s you!” saidRaskolnikov, extremely astonished, and he, too, was confused. He at oncerecollected that his mother and sister knew through Luzhin’s letterof “some young woman of notorious behaviour.” He had only just beenprotesting against Luzhin’s calumny and declaring that he had seen thegirl last night for the first time, and suddenly she had walked in. Heremembered, too, that he had not protested against the expression “ofnotorious behaviour.” All this passed vaguely and fleetingly throughhis brain, but looking at her more intently, he saw that the humiliatedcreature was so humiliated that he felt suddenly sorry for her. When shemade a movement to retreat in terror, it sent a pang to his heart.
“I did not expect you,” he said, hurriedly, with a look that made herstop. “Please sit down. You come, no doubt, from Katerina Ivanovna.Allow me--not there. Sit here....”
At Sonia’s entrance, Razumihin, who had been sitting on one ofRaskolnikov’s three chairs, close to the door, got up to allow her toenter. Raskolnikov had at first shown her the place on the sofa whereZossimov had been sitting, but feeling that the sofa which served himas a bed, was too _familiar_ a place, he hurriedly motioned her toRazumihin’s chair.
“You sit here,” he said to Razumihin, putting him on the sofa.
Sonia sat down, almost shaking with terror, and looked timidly at thetwo ladies. It was evidently almost inconceivable to herself that shecould sit down beside them. At the thought of it, she was so frightenedthat she hurriedly got up again, and in utter confusion addressedRaskolnikov.
“I... I... have come for one minute. Forgive me for disturbing you,” shebegan falteringly. “I come from Katerina Ivanovna, and she had no one tosend. Katerina Ivanovna told me to beg you... to be at the service... inthe morning... at Mitrofanievsky... and then... to us... to her...to do her the honour... she told me to beg you...” Sonia stammered andceased speaking.
“I will try, certainly, most certainly,” answered Raskolnikov. He,too, stood up, and he, too, faltered and could not finish his sentence.“Please sit down,” he said, suddenly. “I want to talk to you. You areperhaps in a hurry, but please, be so kind, spare me two minutes,” andhe drew up a chair for her.
Sonia sat down again, and again timidly she took a hurried, frightenedlook at the two ladies, and dropped her eyes. Raskolnikov’s pale faceflushed, a shudder passed over him, his eyes glowed.
“Mother,” he said, firmly and insistently, “this is Sofya SemyonovnaMarmeladov, the daughter of that unfortunate Mr. Marmeladov, who was runover yesterday before my eyes, and of whom I was just telling you.”
Pulcheria Alexandrovna glanced at Sonia, and slightly screwed upher eyes. In spite of her embarrassment before Rodya’s urgent andchallenging look, she could not deny herself that satisfaction. Douniagazed gravely and intently into the poor girl’s face, and scrutinisedher with perplexity. Sonia, hearing herself introduced, tried to raiseher eyes again, but was more embarrassed than ever.
“I wanted to ask you,” said Raskolnikov, hastily, “how things werearranged yesterday. You were not worried by the police, for instance?”
“No, that was all right... it was too evident, the cause of death...they did not worry us... only the lodgers are angry.”
“Why?”
“At the body’s remaining so long. You see it is hot now. So that,to-day, they will carry it to the cemetery, into the chapel, untilto-morrow. At first Katerina Ivanovna was unwilling, but now she seesherself that it’s necessary...”
“To-day, then?”
“She begs you to do us the honour to be in the church to-morrow for theservice, and then to be present at the funeral lunch.”
“She is giving a funeral lunch?”
“Yes... just a little.... She told me to thank you very much for helpingus yesterday. But for you, we should have had nothing for the funeral.”
All at once her lips and chin began trembling, but, with an effort, shecontrolled herself, looking down again.
During the conversation, Raskolnikov watched her carefully. She had athin, very thin, pale little face, rather irregular and angular, with asharp little nose and chin. She could not have been called pretty, buther blue eyes were so clear, and when they lighted up, there was sucha kindliness and simplicity in her expression that one could not helpbeing attracted. Her face, and her whole figure indeed, had anotherpeculiar characteristic. In spite of her eighteen years, she lookedalmost a little girl--almost a child. And in some of her gestures, thischildishness seemed almost absurd.
“But has Katerina Ivanovna been able to manage with such small means?Does she even mean to have a funeral lunch?” Raskolnikov asked,persistently keeping up the conversation.
“The coffin will be plain, of course... and everything will be plain, soit won’t cost much. Katerina Ivanovna and I have reckoned it all out, sothat there will be enough left... and Katerina Ivanovna was very anxiousit should be so. You know one can’t... it’s a comfort to her... she islike that, you know....”
“I understand, I understand... of course... why do you look at my roomlike that? My mother has just said it is like a tomb.”
“You gave us everything yesterday,” Sonia said suddenly, in reply, in aloud rapid whisper; and again she looked down in confusion. Her lipsand chin were trembling once more. She had been struck at onceby Raskolnikov’s poor surroundings, and now these words broke outspontaneously. A silence followed. There was a light in Dounia’s eyes,and even Pulcheria Alexandrovna looked kindly at Sonia.
“Rodya,” she said, getting up, “we shall have dinner together, ofcourse. Come, Dounia.... And you, Rodya, had better go for a littlewalk, and then rest and lie down before you come to see us.... I amafraid we have exhausted you....”
“Yes, yes, I’ll come,” he answered, getting up fussily. “But I havesomething to see to.”
“But surely you will have dinner together?” cried Razumihin, looking insurprise at Raskolnikov. “What do you mean?”
“Yes, yes, I am coming... of course, of course! And you stay a minute.You do not want him just now, do you, mother? Or perhaps I am taking himfrom you?”
“Oh, no, no. And will you, Dmitri Prokofitch, do us the favour of diningwith us?”
“Please do,” added Dounia.
Razumihin bowed, positively radiant. For one moment, they were allstrangely embarrassed.
“Good-bye, Rodya, that is till we meet. I do not like saying good-bye.Good-bye, Nastasya. Ah, I have said good-bye again.”
Pulcheria Alexandrovna meant to greet Sonia, too; but it somehow failedto come off, and she went in a flutter out of the room.
But Avdotya Romanovna seemed to await her turn, and following her motherout, gave Sonia an attentive, courteous bow. Sonia, in confusion, gavea hurried, frightened curtsy. There was a look of poignant discomfortin her face, as though Avdotya Romanovna’s courtesy and attention wereoppressive and painful to her.
“Dounia, good-bye,” called Raskolnikov, in the passage. “Give me yourhand.”
“Why, I did give it to you. Have you forgotten?” said Dounia, turningwarmly and awkwardly to him.
“Never mind, give it to me again.” And he squeezed her fingers warmly.
Dounia smiled, flushed, pulled her hand away, and went off quite happy.
“Come, that’s capital,” he said to Sonia, going back and lookingbrightly at her. “God give peace to the dead, the living have still tolive. That is right, isn’t it?”
Sonia looked surprised at the sudden brightness of his face. He lookedat her for some moments in silence. The whole history of the dead fatherfloated before his memory in those moments....
*****
“Heavens, Dounia,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna began, as soon as they were inthe street, “I really feel relieved myself at coming away--more at ease.How little did I think yesterday in the train that I could ever be gladof that.”
“I tell you again, mother, he is still very ill. Don’t you see it?Perhaps worrying about us upset him. We must be patient, and much, muchcan be forgiven.”
“Well, you were not very patient!” Pulcheria Alexandrovna caught her up,hotly and jealously. “Do you know, Dounia, I was looking at you two. Youare the very portrait of him, and not so much in face as in soul. Youare both melancholy, both morose and hot-tempered, both haughty and bothgenerous.... Surely he can’t be an egoist, Dounia. Eh? When I think ofwhat is in store for us this evening, my heart sinks!”
“Don’t be uneasy, mother. What must be, will be.”
“Dounia, only think what a position we are in! What if Pyotr Petrovitchbreaks it off?” poor Pulcheria Alexandrovna blurted out, incautiously.
“He won’t be worth much if he does,” answered Dounia, sharply andcontemptuously.
“We did well to come away,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna hurriedly broke in.“He was in a hurry about some business or other. If he gets out and hasa breath of air... it is fearfully close in his room.... But where isone to get a breath of air here? The very streets here feel like shut-uprooms. Good heavens! what a town!... stay... this side... they willcrush you--carrying something. Why, it is a piano they have got, Ideclare... how they push!... I am very much afraid of that young woman,too.”
“What young woman, mother?
“Why, that Sofya Semyonovna, who was there just now.”
“Why?”
“I have a presentiment, Dounia. Well, you may believe it or not, butas soon as she came in, that very minute, I felt that she was the chiefcause of the trouble....”
“Nothing of the sort!” cried Dounia, in vexation. “What nonsense, withyour presentiments, mother! He only made her acquaintance the eveningbefore, and he did not know her when she came in.”
“Well, you will see.... She worries me; but you will see, you willsee! I was so frightened. She was gazing at me with those eyes. I couldscarcely sit still in my chair when he began introducing her, do youremember? It seems so strange, but Pyotr Petrovitch writes like thatabout her, and he introduces her to us--to you! So he must think a greatdeal of her.”
“People will write anything. We were talked about and written about,too. Have you forgotten? I am sure that she is a good girl, and that itis all nonsense.”
“God grant it may be!”
“And Pyotr Petrovitch is a contemptible slanderer,” Dounia snapped out,suddenly.
Pulcheria Alexandrovna was crushed; the conversation was not resumed.
*****
“I will tell you what I want with you,” said Raskolnikov, drawingRazumihin to the window.
“Then I will tell Katerina Ivanovna that you are coming,” Sonia saidhurriedly, preparing to depart.
“One minute, Sofya Semyonovna. We have no secrets. You are not in ourway. I want to have another word or two with you. Listen!” he turnedsuddenly to Razumihin again. “You know that... what’s his name...Porfiry Petrovitch?”
“I should think so! He is a relation. Why?” added the latter, withinterest.
“Is not he managing that case... you know, about that murder?... Youwere speaking about it yesterday.”
“Yes... well?” Razumihin’s eyes opened wide.
“He was inquiring for people who had pawned things, and I have somepledges there, too--trifles--a ring my sister gave me as a keepsake whenI left home, and my father’s silver watch--they are only worth five orsix roubles altogether... but I value them. So what am I to do now? Ido not want to lose the things, especially the watch. I was quaking justnow, for fear mother would ask to look at it, when we spoke of Dounia’swatch. It is the only thing of father’s left us. She would be ill ifit were lost. You know what women are. So tell me what to do. I know Iought to have given notice at the police station, but would it not bebetter to go straight to Porfiry? Eh? What do you think? The mattermight be settled more quickly. You see, mother may ask for it beforedinner.”
“Certainly not to the police station. Certainly to Porfiry,” Razumihinshouted in extraordinary excitement. “Well, how glad I am. Let us go atonce. It is a couple of steps. We shall be sure to find him.”
“Very well, let us go.”
“And he will be very, very glad to make your acquaintance. I haveoften talked to him of you at different times. I was speaking of youyesterday. Let us go. So you knew the old woman? So that’s it! It is allturning out splendidly.... Oh, yes, Sofya Ivanovna...”
“Sofya Semyonovna,” corrected Raskolnikov. “Sofya Semyonovna, this is myfriend Razumihin, and he is a good man.”
“If you have to go now,” Sonia was beginning, not looking at Razumihinat all, and still more embarrassed.
“Let us go,” decided Raskolnikov. “I will come to you to-day, SofyaSemyonovna. Only tell me where you live.”
He was not exactly ill at ease, but seemed hurried, and avoided hereyes. Sonia gave her address, and flushed as she did so. They all wentout together.
“Don’t you lock up?” asked Razumihin, following him on to the stairs.
“Never,” answered Raskolnikov. “I have been meaning to buy a lock forthese two years. People are happy who have no need of locks,” he said,laughing, to Sonia. They stood still in the gateway.
“Do you go to the right, Sofya Semyonovna? How did you find me, by theway?” he added, as though he wanted to say something quite different. Hewanted to look at her soft clear eyes, but this was not easy.
“Why, you gave your address to Polenka yesterday.”
“Polenka? Oh, yes; Polenka, that is the little girl. She is your sister?Did I give her the address?”
“Why, had you forgotten?”
“No, I remember.”
“I had heard my father speak of you... only I did not know your name,and he did not know it. And now I came... and as I had learnt your name,I asked to-day, ‘Where does Mr. Raskolnikov live?’ I did not know youhad only a room too.... Good-bye, I will tell Katerina Ivanovna.”
She was extremely glad to escape at last; she went away looking down,hurrying to get out of sight as soon as possible, to walk the twentysteps to the turning on the right and to be at last alone, and thenmoving rapidly along, looking at no one, noticing nothing, to think, toremember, to meditate on every word, every detail. Never, never had shefelt anything like this. Dimly and unconsciously a whole new world wasopening before her. She remembered suddenly that Raskolnikov meant tocome to her that day, perhaps at once!
“Only not to-day, please, not to-day!” she kept muttering with a sinkingheart, as though entreating someone, like a frightened child. “Mercy! tome... to that room... he will see... oh, dear!”
She was not capable at that instant of noticing an unknown gentleman whowas watching her and following at her heels. He had accompanied her fromthe gateway. At the moment when Razumihin, Raskolnikov, and she stoodstill at parting on the pavement, this gentleman, who was just passing,started on hearing Sonia’s words: “and I asked where Mr. Raskolnikovlived?” He turned a rapid but attentive look upon all three, especiallyupon Raskolnikov, to whom Sonia was speaking; then looked back and notedthe house. All this was done in an instant as he passed, and trying notto betray his interest, he walked on more slowly as though waiting forsomething. He was waiting for Sonia; he saw that they were parting, andthat Sonia was going home.
“Home? Where? I’ve seen that face somewhere,” he thought. “I must findout.”
At the turning he crossed over, looked round, and saw Sonia coming thesame way, noticing nothing. She turned the corner. He followed her onthe other side. After about fifty paces he crossed over again, overtookher and kept two or three yards behind her.
He was a man about fifty, rather tall and thickly set, with broad highshoulders which made him look as though he stooped a little. He woregood and fashionable clothes, and looked like a gentleman of position.He carried a handsome cane, which he tapped on the pavement at eachstep; his gloves were spotless. He had a broad, rather pleasant facewith high cheek-bones and a fresh colour, not often seen in Petersburg.His flaxen hair was still abundant, and only touched here and there withgrey, and his thick square beard was even lighter than his hair.His eyes were blue and had a cold and thoughtful look; his lips werecrimson. He was a remarkedly well-preserved man and looked much youngerthan his years.
When Sonia came out on the canal bank, they were the only two persons onthe pavement. He observed her dreaminess and preoccupation. On reachingthe house where she lodged, Sonia turned in at the gate; he followedher, seeming rather surprised. In the courtyard she turned to the rightcorner. “Bah!” muttered the unknown gentleman, and mounted the stairsbehind her. Only then Sonia noticed him. She reached the third storey,turned down the passage, and rang at No. 9. On the door was inscribedin chalk, “Kapernaumov, Tailor.” “Bah!” the stranger repeated again,wondering at the strange coincidence, and he rang next door, at No. 8.The doors were two or three yards apart.
“You lodge at Kapernaumov’s,” he said, looking at Sonia and laughing.“He altered a waistcoat for me yesterday. I am staying close here atMadame Resslich’s. How odd!” Sonia looked at him attentively.
“We are neighbours,” he went on gaily. “I only came to town the daybefore yesterday. Good-bye for the present.”
Sonia made no reply; the door opened and she slipped in. She felt forsome reason ashamed and uneasy.
*****
On the way to Porfiry’s, Razumihin was obviously excited.
“That’s capital, brother,” he repeated several times, “and I am glad! Iam glad!”
“What are you glad about?” Raskolnikov thought to himself.
“I didn’t know that you pledged things at the old woman’s, too. And...was it long ago? I mean, was it long since you were there?”
“What a simple-hearted fool he is!”
“When was it?” Raskolnikov stopped still to recollect. “Two or threedays before her death it must have been. But I am not going to redeemthe things now,” he put in with a sort of hurried and conspicuoussolicitude about the things. “I’ve not more than a silver roubleleft... after last night’s accursed delirium!”
He laid special emphasis on the delirium.
“Yes, yes,” Razumihin hastened to agree--with what was not clear. “Thenthat’s why you... were stuck... partly... you know in your delirium youwere continually mentioning some rings or chains! Yes, yes... that’sclear, it’s all clear now.”
“Hullo! How that idea must have got about among them. Here this man willgo to the stake for me, and I find him delighted at having it _clearedup_ why I spoke of rings in my delirium! What a hold the idea must haveon all of them!”
“Shall we find him?” he asked suddenly.
“Oh, yes,” Razumihin answered quickly. “He is a nice fellow, you willsee, brother. Rather clumsy, that is to say, he is a man of polishedmanners, but I mean clumsy in a different sense. He is an intelligentfellow, very much so indeed, but he has his own range of ideas.... Heis incredulous, sceptical, cynical... he likes to impose on people, orrather to make fun of them. His is the old, circumstantial method....But he understands his work... thoroughly.... Last year he cleared up acase of murder in which the police had hardly a clue. He is very, veryanxious to make your acquaintance!”
“On what grounds is he so anxious?”
“Oh, it’s not exactly... you see, since you’ve been ill I happen to havementioned you several times.... So, when he heard about you... aboutyour being a law student and not able to finish your studies, he said,‘What a pity!’ And so I concluded... from everything together, not onlythat; yesterday Zametov... you know, Rodya, I talked some nonsense onthe way home to you yesterday, when I was drunk... I am afraid, brother,of your exaggerating it, you see.”
“What? That they think I am a madman? Maybe they are right,” he saidwith a constrained smile.
“Yes, yes.... That is, pooh, no!... But all that I said (and there wassomething else too) it was all nonsense, drunken nonsense.”
“But why are you apologising? I am so sick of it all!” Raskolnikov criedwith exaggerated irritability. It was partly assumed, however.
“I know, I know, I understand. Believe me, I understand. One’s ashamedto speak of it.”
“If you are ashamed, then don’t speak of it.”
Both were silent. Razumihin was more than ecstatic and Raskolnikovperceived it with repulsion. He was alarmed, too, by what Razumihin hadjust said about Porfiry.
“I shall have to pull a long face with him too,” he thought, with abeating heart, and he turned white, “and do it naturally, too. But themost natural thing would be to do nothing at all. Carefully do nothingat all! No, _carefully_ would not be natural again.... Oh, well, weshall see how it turns out.... We shall see... directly. Is it a goodthing to go or not? The butterfly flies to the light. My heart isbeating, that’s what’s bad!”
“In this grey house,” said Razumihin.
“The most important thing, does Porfiry know that I was at the oldhag’s flat yesterday... and asked about the blood? I must find that outinstantly, as soon as I go in, find out from his face; otherwise... I’llfind out, if it’s my ruin.”
“I say, brother,” he said suddenly, addressing Razumihin, with a slysmile, “I have been noticing all day that you seem to be curiouslyexcited. Isn’t it so?”
“Excited? Not a bit of it,” said Razumihin, stung to the quick.
“Yes, brother, I assure you it’s noticeable. Why, you sat on your chairin a way you never do sit, on the edge somehow, and you seemed to bewrithing all the time. You kept jumping up for nothing. One moment youwere angry, and the next your face looked like a sweetmeat. You evenblushed; especially when you were invited to dinner, you blushedawfully.”
“Nothing of the sort, nonsense! What do you mean?”
“But why are you wriggling out of it, like a schoolboy? By Jove, therehe’s blushing again.”
“What a pig you are!”
“But why are you so shamefaced about it? Romeo! Stay, I’ll tell of youto-day. Ha-ha-ha! I’ll make mother laugh, and someone else, too...”
“Listen, listen, listen, this is serious.... What next, you fiend!”Razumihin was utterly overwhelmed, turning cold with horror. “What willyou tell them? Come, brother... foo! what a pig you are!”
“You are like a summer rose. And if only you knew how it suits you; aRomeo over six foot high! And how you’ve washed to-day--you cleaned yournails, I declare. Eh? That’s something unheard of! Why, I do believeyou’ve got pomatum on your hair! Bend down.”
“Pig!”
Raskolnikov laughed as though he could not restrain himself. Solaughing, they entered Porfiry Petrovitch’s flat. This is whatRaskolnikov wanted: from within they could be heard laughing as theycame in, still guffawing in the passage.
“Not a word here or I’ll... brain you!” Razumihin whispered furiously,seizing Raskolnikov by the shoulder.
CHAPTER V
Raskolnikov was already entering the room. He came in looking as thoughhe had the utmost difficulty not to burst out laughing again. Behind himRazumihin strode in gawky and awkward, shamefaced and red as a peony,with an utterly crestfallen and ferocious expression. His face andwhole figure really were ridiculous at that moment and amply justifiedRaskolnikov’s laughter. Raskolnikov, not waiting for an introduction,bowed to Porfiry Petrovitch, who stood in the middle of the roomlooking inquiringly at them. He held out his hand and shook hands, stillapparently making desperate efforts to subdue his mirth and utter a fewwords to introduce himself. But he had no sooner succeeded in assuminga serious air and muttering something when he suddenly glanced again asthough accidentally at Razumihin, and could no longer control himself:his stifled laughter broke out the more irresistibly the more he triedto restrain it. The extraordinary ferocity with which Razumihin receivedthis “spontaneous” mirth gave the whole scene the appearance of mostgenuine fun and naturalness. Razumihin strengthened this impression asthough on purpose.
“Fool! You fiend,” he roared, waving his arm which at once struck alittle round table with an empty tea-glass on it. Everything was sentflying and crashing.
“But why break chairs, gentlemen? You know it’s a loss to the Crown,”Porfiry Petrovitch quoted gaily.
Raskolnikov was still laughing, with his hand in Porfiry Petrovitch’s,but anxious not to overdo it, awaited the right moment to put a naturalend to it. Razumihin, completely put to confusion by upsetting the tableand smashing the glass, gazed gloomily at the fragments, cursed andturned sharply to the window where he stood looking out with his backto the company with a fiercely scowling countenance, seeing nothing.Porfiry Petrovitch laughed and was ready to go on laughing, butobviously looked for explanations. Zametov had been sitting in thecorner, but he rose at the visitors’ entrance and was standing inexpectation with a smile on his lips, though he looked with surprise andeven it seemed incredulity at the whole scene and at Raskolnikov with acertain embarrassment. Zametov’s unexpected presence struck Raskolnikovunpleasantly.
“I’ve got to think of that,” he thought. “Excuse me, please,” he began,affecting extreme embarrassment. “Raskolnikov.”
“Not at all, very pleasant to see you... and how pleasantly you’ve comein.... Why, won’t he even say good-morning?” Porfiry Petrovitch noddedat Razumihin.
“Upon my honour I don’t know why he is in such a rage with me. I onlytold him as we came along that he was like Romeo... and proved it. Andthat was all, I think!”
“Pig!” ejaculated Razumihin, without turning round.
“There must have been very grave grounds for it, if he is so furious atthe word,” Porfiry laughed.
“Oh, you sharp lawyer!... Damn you all!” snapped Razumihin, and suddenlybursting out laughing himself, he went up to Porfiry with a morecheerful face as though nothing had happened. “That’ll do! We areall fools. To come to business. This is my friend Rodion RomanovitchRaskolnikov; in the first place he has heard of you and wants to makeyour acquaintance, and secondly, he has a little matter of business withyou. Bah! Zametov, what brought you here? Have you met before? Have youknown each other long?”
“What does this mean?” thought Raskolnikov uneasily.
Zametov seemed taken aback, but not very much so.
“Why, it was at your rooms we met yesterday,” he said easily.
“Then I have been spared the trouble. All last week he was begging meto introduce him to you. Porfiry and you have sniffed each other outwithout me. Where is your tobacco?”
Porfiry Petrovitch was wearing a dressing-gown, very clean linen, andtrodden-down slippers. He was a man of about five and thirty, short,stout even to corpulence, and clean shaven. He wore his hair cut shortand had a large round head, particularly prominent at the back. Hissoft, round, rather snub-nosed face was of a sickly yellowish colour,but had a vigorous and rather ironical expression. It would have beengood-natured except for a look in the eyes, which shone with a watery,mawkish light under almost white, blinking eyelashes. The expressionof those eyes was strangely out of keeping with his somewhat womanishfigure, and gave it something far more serious than could be guessed atfirst sight.
As soon as Porfiry Petrovitch heard that his visitor had a little matterof business with him, he begged him to sit down on the sofa and sat downhimself on the other end, waiting for him to explain his business, withthat careful and over-serious attention which is at once oppressive andembarrassing, especially to a stranger, and especially if what you arediscussing is in your opinion of far too little importance for suchexceptional solemnity. But in brief and coherent phrases Raskolnikovexplained his business clearly and exactly, and was so well satisfiedwith himself that he even succeeded in taking a good look at Porfiry.Porfiry Petrovitch did not once take his eyes off him. Razumihin,sitting opposite at the same table, listened warmly and impatiently,looking from one to the other every moment with rather excessiveinterest.
“Fool,” Raskolnikov swore to himself.
“You have to give information to the police,” Porfiry replied, with amost businesslike air, “that having learnt of this incident, that is ofthe murder, you beg to inform the lawyer in charge of the case that suchand such things belong to you, and that you desire to redeem them...or... but they will write to you.”
“That’s just the point, that at the present moment,” Raskolnikov triedhis utmost to feign embarrassment, “I am not quite in funds... andeven this trifling sum is beyond me... I only wanted, you see, forthe present to declare that the things are mine, and that when I havemoney....”
“That’s no matter,” answered Porfiry Petrovitch, receiving hisexplanation of his pecuniary position coldly, “but you can, if youprefer, write straight to me, to say, that having been informed of thematter, and claiming such and such as your property, you beg...”
“On an ordinary sheet of paper?” Raskolnikov interrupted eagerly, againinterested in the financial side of the question.
“Oh, the most ordinary,” and suddenly Porfiry Petrovitch looked withobvious irony at him, screwing up his eyes and, as it were, winking athim. But perhaps it was Raskolnikov’s fancy, for it all lasted but amoment. There was certainly something of the sort, Raskolnikov couldhave sworn he winked at him, goodness knows why.
“He knows,” flashed through his mind like lightning.
“Forgive my troubling you about such trifles,” he went on, a littledisconcerted, “the things are only worth five roubles, but I prize themparticularly for the sake of those from whom they came to me, and I mustconfess that I was alarmed when I heard...”
“That’s why you were so much struck when I mentioned to Zossimov thatPorfiry was inquiring for everyone who had pledges!” Razumihin put inwith obvious intention.
This was really unbearable. Raskolnikov could not help glancing at himwith a flash of vindictive anger in his black eyes, but immediatelyrecollected himself.
“You seem to be jeering at me, brother?” he said to him, with awell-feigned irritability. “I dare say I do seem to you absurdly anxiousabout such trash; but you mustn’t think me selfish or grasping for that,and these two things may be anything but trash in my eyes. I told youjust now that the silver watch, though it’s not worth a cent, is theonly thing left us of my father’s. You may laugh at me, but my mother ishere,” he turned suddenly to Porfiry, “and if she knew,” he turned againhurriedly to Razumihin, carefully making his voice tremble, “that thewatch was lost, she would be in despair! You know what women are!”
“Not a bit of it! I didn’t mean that at all! Quite the contrary!”shouted Razumihin distressed.
“Was it right? Was it natural? Did I overdo it?” Raskolnikov askedhimself in a tremor. “Why did I say that about women?”
“Oh, your mother is with you?” Porfiry Petrovitch inquired.
“Yes.”
“When did she come?”
“Last night.”
Porfiry paused as though reflecting.
“Your things would not in any case be lost,” he went on calmly andcoldly. “I have been expecting you here for some time.”
And as though that was a matter of no importance, he carefully offeredthe ash-tray to Razumihin, who was ruthlessly scattering cigarette ashover the carpet. Raskolnikov shuddered, but Porfiry did not seem to belooking at him, and was still concerned with Razumihin’s cigarette.
“What? Expecting him? Why, did you know that he had pledges _there_?”cried Razumihin.
Porfiry Petrovitch addressed himself to Raskolnikov.
“Your things, the ring and the watch, were wrapped up together, and onthe paper your name was legibly written in pencil, together with thedate on which you left them with her...”
“How observant you are!” Raskolnikov smiled awkwardly, doing his veryutmost to look him straight in the face, but he failed, and suddenlyadded:
“I say that because I suppose there were a great many pledges... that itmust be difficult to remember them all.... But you remember them all soclearly, and... and...”
“Stupid! Feeble!” he thought. “Why did I add that?”
“But we know all who had pledges, and you are the only one who hasn’tcome forward,” Porfiry answered with hardly perceptible irony.
“I haven’t been quite well.”
“I heard that too. I heard, indeed, that you were in great distressabout something. You look pale still.”
“I am not pale at all.... No, I am quite well,” Raskolnikov snappedout rudely and angrily, completely changing his tone. His anger wasmounting, he could not repress it. “And in my anger I shall betraymyself,” flashed through his mind again. “Why are they torturing me?”
“Not quite well!” Razumihin caught him up. “What next! He wasunconscious and delirious all yesterday. Would you believe, Porfiry, assoon as our backs were turned, he dressed, though he could hardly stand,and gave us the slip and went off on a spree somewhere till midnight,delirious all the time! Would you believe it! Extraordinary!”
“Really delirious? You don’t say so!” Porfiry shook his head in awomanish way.
“Nonsense! Don’t you believe it! But you don’t believe it anyway,”Raskolnikov let slip in his anger. But Porfiry Petrovitch did not seemto catch those strange words.
“But how could you have gone out if you hadn’t been delirious?”Razumihin got hot suddenly. “What did you go out for? What was theobject of it? And why on the sly? Were you in your senses when you didit? Now that all danger is over I can speak plainly.”
“I was awfully sick of them yesterday.” Raskolnikov addressed Porfirysuddenly with a smile of insolent defiance, “I ran away from them totake lodgings where they wouldn’t find me, and took a lot of money withme. Mr. Zametov there saw it. I say, Mr. Zametov, was I sensible ordelirious yesterday; settle our dispute.”
He could have strangled Zametov at that moment, so hateful were hisexpression and his silence to him.
“In my opinion you talked sensibly and even artfully, but you wereextremely irritable,” Zametov pronounced dryly.
“And Nikodim Fomitch was telling me to-day,” put in Porfiry Petrovitch,“that he met you very late last night in the lodging of a man who hadbeen run over.”
“And there,” said Razumihin, “weren’t you mad then? You gave your lastpenny to the widow for the funeral. If you wanted to help, give fifteenor twenty even, but keep three roubles for yourself at least, but heflung away all the twenty-five at once!”
“Maybe I found a treasure somewhere and you know nothing of it? Sothat’s why I was liberal yesterday.... Mr. Zametov knows I’ve found atreasure! Excuse us, please, for disturbing you for half an hourwith such trivialities,” he said, turning to Porfiry Petrovitch, withtrembling lips. “We are boring you, aren’t we?”
“Oh no, quite the contrary, quite the contrary! If only you knew how youinterest me! It’s interesting to look on and listen... and I am reallyglad you have come forward at last.”
“But you might give us some tea! My throat’s dry,” cried Razumihin.
“Capital idea! Perhaps we will all keep you company. Wouldn’t youlike... something more essential before tea?”
“Get along with you!”
Porfiry Petrovitch went out to order tea.
Raskolnikov’s thoughts were in a whirl. He was in terrible exasperation.
“The worst of it is they don’t disguise it; they don’t care to stand onceremony! And how if you didn’t know me at all, did you come to talkto Nikodim Fomitch about me? So they don’t care to hide that they aretracking me like a pack of dogs. They simply spit in my face.” He wasshaking with rage. “Come, strike me openly, don’t play with me like acat with a mouse. It’s hardly civil, Porfiry Petrovitch, but perhaps Iwon’t allow it! I shall get up and throw the whole truth in your uglyfaces, and you’ll see how I despise you.” He could hardly breathe.“And what if it’s only my fancy? What if I am mistaken, and throughinexperience I get angry and don’t keep up my nasty part? Perhaps it’sall unintentional. All their phrases are the usual ones, but there issomething about them.... It all might be said, but there is something.Why did he say bluntly, ‘With her’? Why did Zametov add that I spokeartfully? Why do they speak in that tone? Yes, the tone.... Razumihinis sitting here, why does he see nothing? That innocent blockhead neverdoes see anything! Feverish again! Did Porfiry wink at me just now? Ofcourse it’s nonsense! What could he wink for? Are they trying to upsetmy nerves or are they teasing me? Either it’s ill fancy or they know!Even Zametov is rude.... Is Zametov rude? Zametov has changed his mind.I foresaw he would change his mind! He is at home here, while it’s myfirst visit. Porfiry does not consider him a visitor; sits with his backto him. They’re as thick as thieves, no doubt, over me! Not a doubt theywere talking about me before we came. Do they know about the flat? Ifonly they’d make haste! When I said that I ran away to take a flat helet it pass.... I put that in cleverly about a flat, it may be of useafterwards.... Delirious, indeed... ha-ha-ha! He knows all about lastnight! He didn’t know of my mother’s arrival! The hag had written thedate on in pencil! You are wrong, you won’t catch me! There are nofacts... it’s all supposition! You produce facts! The flat even isn’t afact but delirium. I know what to say to them.... Do they know about theflat? I won’t go without finding out. What did I come for? But my beingangry now, maybe is a fact! Fool, how irritable I am! Perhaps that’sright; to play the invalid.... He is feeling me. He will try to catchme. Why did I come?”
All this flashed like lightning through his mind.
Porfiry Petrovitch returned quickly. He became suddenly more jovial.
“Your party yesterday, brother, has left my head rather.... And I am outof sorts altogether,” he began in quite a different tone, laughing toRazumihin.
“Was it interesting? I left you yesterday at the most interesting point.Who got the best of it?”
“Oh, no one, of course. They got on to everlasting questions, floatedoff into space.”
“Only fancy, Rodya, what we got on to yesterday. Whether there is such athing as crime. I told you that we talked our heads off.”
“What is there strange? It’s an everyday social question,” Raskolnikovanswered casually.
“The question wasn’t put quite like that,” observed Porfiry.
“Not quite, that’s true,” Razumihin agreed at once, getting warm andhurried as usual. “Listen, Rodion, and tell us your opinion, I want tohear it. I was fighting tooth and nail with them and wanted you tohelp me. I told them you were coming.... It began with the socialistdoctrine. You know their doctrine; crime is a protest against theabnormality of the social organisation and nothing more, and nothingmore; no other causes admitted!...”
“You are wrong there,” cried Porfiry Petrovitch; he was noticeablyanimated and kept laughing as he looked at Razumihin, which made himmore excited than ever.
“Nothing is admitted,” Razumihin interrupted with heat.
“I am not wrong. I’ll show you their pamphlets. Everything with themis ‘the influence of environment,’ and nothing else. Their favouritephrase! From which it follows that, if society is normally organised,all crime will cease at once, since there will be nothing to protestagainst and all men will become righteous in one instant. Human natureis not taken into account, it is excluded, it’s not supposed to exist!They don’t recognise that humanity, developing by a historical livingprocess, will become at last a normal society, but they believe that asocial system that has come out of some mathematical brain is goingto organise all humanity at once and make it just and sinless in aninstant, quicker than any living process! That’s why they instinctivelydislike history, ‘nothing but ugliness and stupidity in it,’ and theyexplain it all as stupidity! That’s why they so dislike the _living_process of life; they don’t want a _living soul_! The living souldemands life, the soul won’t obey the rules of mechanics, the soul is anobject of suspicion, the soul is retrograde! But what they want thoughit smells of death and can be made of India-rubber, at least is notalive, has no will, is servile and won’t revolt! And it comes in the endto their reducing everything to the building of walls and the planningof rooms and passages in a phalanstery! The phalanstery is ready,indeed, but your human nature is not ready for the phalanstery--itwants life, it hasn’t completed its vital process, it’s too soon for thegraveyard! You can’t skip over nature by logic. Logic presupposes threepossibilities, but there are millions! Cut away a million, and reduceit all to the question of comfort! That’s the easiest solution of theproblem! It’s seductively clear and you musn’t think about it. That’sthe great thing, you mustn’t think! The whole secret of life in twopages of print!”
“Now he is off, beating the drum! Catch hold of him, do!” laughedPorfiry. “Can you imagine,” he turned to Raskolnikov, “six peopleholding forth like that last night, in one room, with punch as apreliminary! No, brother, you are wrong, environment accounts for agreat deal in crime; I can assure you of that.”
“Oh, I know it does, but just tell me: a man of forty violates a childof ten; was it environment drove him to it?”
“Well, strictly speaking, it did,” Porfiry observed with noteworthygravity; “a crime of that nature may be very well ascribed to theinfluence of environment.”
Razumihin was almost in a frenzy. “Oh, if you like,” he roared. “I’llprove to you that your white eyelashes may very well be ascribed to theChurch of Ivan the Great’s being two hundred and fifty feet high, and Iwill prove it clearly, exactly, progressively, and even with a Liberaltendency! I undertake to! Will you bet on it?”
“Done! Let’s hear, please, how he will prove it!”
“He is always humbugging, confound him,” cried Razumihin, jumping up andgesticulating. “What’s the use of talking to you? He does all thaton purpose; you don’t know him, Rodion! He took their side yesterday,simply to make fools of them. And the things he said yesterday! And theywere delighted! He can keep it up for a fortnight together. Last year hepersuaded us that he was going into a monastery: he stuck to it for twomonths. Not long ago he took it into his head to declare he was goingto get married, that he had everything ready for the wedding. He orderednew clothes indeed. We all began to congratulate him. There was nobride, nothing, all pure fantasy!”
“Ah, you are wrong! I got the clothes before. It was the new clothes infact that made me think of taking you in.”
“Are you such a good dissembler?” Raskolnikov asked carelessly.
“You wouldn’t have supposed it, eh? Wait a bit, I shall take you in,too. Ha-ha-ha! No, I’ll tell you the truth. All these questions aboutcrime, environment, children, recall to my mind an article of yourswhich interested me at the time. ‘On Crime’... or something of thesort, I forget the title, I read it with pleasure two months ago in the_Periodical Review_.”
“My article? In the _Periodical Review_?” Raskolnikov asked inastonishment. “I certainly did write an article upon a book six monthsago when I left the university, but I sent it to the _Weekly Review_.”
“But it came out in the _Periodical_.”
“And the _Weekly Review_ ceased to exist, so that’s why it wasn’tprinted at the time.”
“That’s true; but when it ceased to exist, the _Weekly Review_ wasamalgamated with the _Periodical_, and so your article appeared twomonths ago in the latter. Didn’t you know?”
Raskolnikov had not known.
“Why, you might get some money out of them for the article! What astrange person you are! You lead such a solitary life that you knownothing of matters that concern you directly. It’s a fact, I assureyou.”
“Bravo, Rodya! I knew nothing about it either!” cried Razumihin. “I’llrun to-day to the reading-room and ask for the number. Two months ago?What was the date? It doesn’t matter though, I will find it. Think ofnot telling us!”
“How did you find out that the article was mine? It’s only signed withan initial.”
“I only learnt it by chance, the other day. Through the editor; I knowhim.... I was very much interested.”
“I analysed, if I remember, the psychology of a criminal before andafter the crime.”
“Yes, and you maintained that the perpetration of a crime is alwaysaccompanied by illness. Very, very original, but... it was not that partof your article that interested me so much, but an idea at the end ofthe article which I regret to say you merely suggested without workingit out clearly. There is, if you recollect, a suggestion that there arecertain persons who can... that is, not precisely are able to, but havea perfect right to commit breaches of morality and crimes, and that thelaw is not for them.”
Raskolnikov smiled at the exaggerated and intentional distortion of hisidea.
“What? What do you mean? A right to crime? But not because of theinfluence of environment?” Razumihin inquired with some alarm even.
“No, not exactly because of it,” answered Porfiry. “In his article allmen are divided into ‘ordinary’ and ‘extraordinary.’ Ordinary men haveto live in submission, have no right to transgress the law, because,don’t you see, they are ordinary. But extraordinary men have a right tocommit any crime and to transgress the law in any way, just because theyare extraordinary. That was your idea, if I am not mistaken?”
“What do you mean? That can’t be right?” Razumihin muttered inbewilderment.
Raskolnikov smiled again. He saw the point at once, and knew where theywanted to drive him. He decided to take up the challenge.
“That wasn’t quite my contention,” he began simply and modestly. “YetI admit that you have stated it almost correctly; perhaps, if you like,perfectly so.” (It almost gave him pleasure to admit this.) “The onlydifference is that I don’t contend that extraordinary people are alwaysbound to commit breaches of morals, as you call it. In fact, I doubtwhether such an argument could be published. I simply hinted that an‘extraordinary’ man has the right... that is not an official right, butan inner right to decide in his own conscience to overstep... certainobstacles, and only in case it is essential for the practical fulfilmentof his idea (sometimes, perhaps, of benefit to the whole of humanity).You say that my article isn’t definite; I am ready to make it as clearas I can. Perhaps I am right in thinking you want me to; very well. Imaintain that if the discoveries of Kepler and Newton could not havebeen made known except by sacrificing the lives of one, a dozen, ahundred, or more men, Newton would have had the right, would indeed havebeen in duty-bound... to _eliminate_ the dozen or the hundred men forthe sake of making his discoveries known to the whole of humanity. Butit does not follow from that that Newton had a right to murder peopleright and left and to steal every day in the market. Then, I remember, Imaintain in my article that all... well, legislators and leaders of men,such as Lycurgus, Solon, Mahomet, Napoleon, and so on, were all withoutexception criminals, from the very fact that, making a new law, theytransgressed the ancient one, handed down from their ancestors and heldsacred by the people, and they did not stop short at bloodshed either,if that bloodshed--often of innocent persons fighting bravely in defenceof ancient law--were of use to their cause. It’s remarkable, in fact,that the majority, indeed, of these benefactors and leaders of humanitywere guilty of terrible carnage. In short, I maintain that all great menor even men a little out of the common, that is to say capable of givingsome new word, must from their very nature be criminals--more or less,of course. Otherwise it’s hard for them to get out of the common rut;and to remain in the common rut is what they can’t submit to, from theirvery nature again, and to my mind they ought not, indeed, to submit toit. You see that there is nothing particularly new in all that. Thesame thing has been printed and read a thousand times before. As for mydivision of people into ordinary and extraordinary, I acknowledge thatit’s somewhat arbitrary, but I don’t insist upon exact numbers. I onlybelieve in my leading idea that men are _in general_ divided by a lawof nature into two categories, inferior (ordinary), that is, so to say,material that serves only to reproduce its kind, and men who havethe gift or the talent to utter _a new word_. There are, of course,innumerable sub-divisions, but the distinguishing features of bothcategories are fairly well marked. The first category, generallyspeaking, are men conservative in temperament and law-abiding; they liveunder control and love to be controlled. To my thinking it is their dutyto be controlled, because that’s their vocation, and there is nothinghumiliating in it for them. The second category all transgress thelaw; they are destroyers or disposed to destruction according to theircapacities. The crimes of these men are of course relative and varied;for the most part they seek in very varied ways the destruction of thepresent for the sake of the better. But if such a one is forced for thesake of his idea to step over a corpse or wade through blood, he can, Imaintain, find within himself, in his conscience, a sanction for wadingthrough blood--that depends on the idea and its dimensions, note that.It’s only in that sense I speak of their right to crime in my article(you remember it began with the legal question). There’s no need forsuch anxiety, however; the masses will scarcely ever admit this right,they punish them or hang them (more or less), and in doing so fulfilquite justly their conservative vocation. But the same masses set thesecriminals on a pedestal in the next generation and worship them (more orless). The first category is always the man of the present, the secondthe man of the future. The first preserve the world and people it, thesecond move the world and lead it to its goal. Each class has an equalright to exist. In fact, all have equal rights with me--and _vive laguerre éternelle_--till the New Jerusalem, of course!”
“Then you believe in the New Jerusalem, do you?”
“I do,” Raskolnikov answered firmly; as he said these words and duringthe whole preceding tirade he kept his eyes on one spot on the carpet.
“And... and do you believe in God? Excuse my curiosity.”
“I do,” repeated Raskolnikov, raising his eyes to Porfiry.
“And... do you believe in Lazarus’ rising from the dead?”
“I... I do. Why do you ask all this?”
“You believe it literally?”
“Literally.”
“You don’t say so.... I asked from curiosity. Excuse me. But let usgo back to the question; they are not always executed. Some, on thecontrary...”
“Triumph in their lifetime? Oh, yes, some attain their ends in thislife, and then...”
“They begin executing other people?”
“If it’s necessary; indeed, for the most part they do. Your remark isvery witty.”
“Thank you. But tell me this: how do you distinguish those extraordinarypeople from the ordinary ones? Are there signs at their birth? I feelthere ought to be more exactitude, more external definition. Excuse thenatural anxiety of a practical law-abiding citizen, but couldn’t theyadopt a special uniform, for instance, couldn’t they wear something, bebranded in some way? For you know if confusion arises and a member ofone category imagines that he belongs to the other, begins to ‘eliminateobstacles’ as you so happily expressed it, then...”
“Oh, that very often happens! That remark is wittier than the other.”
“Thank you.”
“No reason to; but take note that the mistake can only arise inthe first category, that is among the ordinary people (as I perhapsunfortunately called them). In spite of their predisposition toobedience very many of them, through a playfulness of nature, sometimesvouchsafed even to the cow, like to imagine themselves advanced people,‘destroyers,’ and to push themselves into the ‘new movement,’ andthis quite sincerely. Meanwhile the really _new_ people are very oftenunobserved by them, or even despised as reactionaries of grovellingtendencies. But I don’t think there is any considerable danger here,and you really need not be uneasy for they never go very far. Of course,they might have a thrashing sometimes for letting their fancy run awaywith them and to teach them their place, but no more; in fact, eventhis isn’t necessary as they castigate themselves, for they are veryconscientious: some perform this service for one another and otherschastise themselves with their own hands.... They will impose variouspublic acts of penitence upon themselves with a beautiful and edifyingeffect; in fact you’ve nothing to be uneasy about.... It’s a law ofnature.”
“Well, you have certainly set my mind more at rest on that score; butthere’s another thing worries me. Tell me, please, are there many peoplewho have the right to kill others, these extraordinary people? I amready to bow down to them, of course, but you must admit it’s alarmingif there are a great many of them, eh?”
“Oh, you needn’t worry about that either,” Raskolnikov went on in thesame tone. “People with new ideas, people with the faintest capacity forsaying something _new_, are extremely few in number, extraordinarilyso in fact. One thing only is clear, that the appearance of all thesegrades and sub-divisions of men must follow with unfailing regularitysome law of nature. That law, of course, is unknown at present, but I amconvinced that it exists, and one day may become known. The vast mass ofmankind is mere material, and only exists in order by some great effort,by some mysterious process, by means of some crossing of races andstocks, to bring into the world at last perhaps one man out of athousand with a spark of independence. One in ten thousand perhaps--Ispeak roughly, approximately--is born with some independence, and withstill greater independence one in a hundred thousand. The man of geniusis one of millions, and the great geniuses, the crown of humanity,appear on earth perhaps one in many thousand millions. In fact I havenot peeped into the retort in which all this takes place. But therecertainly is and must be a definite law, it cannot be a matter ofchance.”
“Why, are you both joking?” Razumihin cried at last. “There you sit,making fun of one another. Are you serious, Rodya?”
Raskolnikov raised his pale and almost mournful face and made no reply.And the unconcealed, persistent, nervous, and _discourteous_ sarcasm ofPorfiry seemed strange to Razumihin beside that quiet and mournful face.
“Well, brother, if you are really serious... You are right, of course,in saying that it’s not new, that it’s like what we’ve read and heard athousand times already; but what is really original in all this, and isexclusively your own, to my horror, is that you sanction bloodshed_in the name of conscience_, and, excuse my saying so, with suchfanaticism.... That, I take it, is the point of your article. But thatsanction of bloodshed _by conscience_ is to my mind... more terriblethan the official, legal sanction of bloodshed....”
“You are quite right, it is more terrible,” Porfiry agreed.
“Yes, you must have exaggerated! There is some mistake, I shall read it.You can’t think that! I shall read it.”
“All that is not in the article, there’s only a hint of it,” saidRaskolnikov.
“Yes, yes.” Porfiry couldn’t sit still. “Your attitude to crime ispretty clear to me now, but... excuse me for my impertinence (I amreally ashamed to be worrying you like this), you see, you’ve removedmy anxiety as to the two grades getting mixed, but... there are variouspractical possibilities that make me uneasy! What if some man or youthimagines that he is a Lycurgus or Mahomet--a future one of course--andsuppose he begins to remove all obstacles.... He has some greatenterprise before him and needs money for it... and tries to get it...do you see?”
Zametov gave a sudden guffaw in his corner. Raskolnikov did not evenraise his eyes to him.
“I must admit,” he went on calmly, “that such cases certainly mustarise. The vain and foolish are particularly apt to fall into thatsnare; young people especially.”
“Yes, you see. Well then?”
“What then?” Raskolnikov smiled in reply; “that’s not my fault. So it isand so it always will be. He said just now (he nodded at Razumihin)that I sanction bloodshed. Society is too well protected by prisons,banishment, criminal investigators, penal servitude. There’s no need tobe uneasy. You have but to catch the thief.”
“And what if we do catch him?”
“Then he gets what he deserves.”
“You are certainly logical. But what of his conscience?”
“Why do you care about that?”
“Simply from humanity.”
“If he has a conscience he will suffer for his mistake. That will be hispunishment--as well as the prison.”
“But the real geniuses,” asked Razumihin frowning, “those who havethe right to murder? Oughtn’t they to suffer at all even for the bloodthey’ve shed?”
“Why the word _ought_? It’s not a matter of permission or prohibition.He will suffer if he is sorry for his victim. Pain and suffering arealways inevitable for a large intelligence and a deep heart. Thereally great men must, I think, have great sadness on earth,” he addeddreamily, not in the tone of the conversation.
He raised his eyes, looked earnestly at them all, smiled, and took hiscap. He was too quiet by comparison with his manner at his entrance, andhe felt this. Everyone got up.
“Well, you may abuse me, be angry with me if you like,” PorfiryPetrovitch began again, “but I can’t resist. Allow me one littlequestion (I know I am troubling you). There is just one little notion Iwant to express, simply that I may not forget it.”
“Very good, tell me your little notion,” Raskolnikov stood waiting, paleand grave before him.
“Well, you see... I really don’t know how to express it properly....It’s a playful, psychological idea.... When you were writing yourarticle, surely you couldn’t have helped, he-he! fancying yourself...just a little, an ‘extraordinary’ man, uttering a _new word_ in yoursense.... That’s so, isn’t it?”
“Quite possibly,” Raskolnikov answered contemptuously.
Razumihin made a movement.
“And, if so, could you bring yourself in case of worldly difficultiesand hardship or for some service to humanity--to overstep obstacles?...For instance, to rob and murder?”
And again he winked with his left eye, and laughed noiselessly just asbefore.
“If I did I certainly should not tell you,” Raskolnikov answered withdefiant and haughty contempt.
“No, I was only interested on account of your article, from a literarypoint of view...”
“Foo! how obvious and insolent that is!” Raskolnikov thought withrepulsion.
“Allow me to observe,” he answered dryly, “that I don’t consider myselfa Mahomet or a Napoleon, nor any personage of that kind, and not beingone of them I cannot tell you how I should act.”
“Oh, come, don’t we all think ourselves Napoleons now in Russia?”Porfiry Petrovitch said with alarming familiarity.
Something peculiar betrayed itself in the very intonation of his voice.
“Perhaps it was one of these future Napoleons who did for AlyonaIvanovna last week?” Zametov blurted out from the corner.
Raskolnikov did not speak, but looked firmly and intently at Porfiry.Razumihin was scowling gloomily. He seemed before this to be noticingsomething. He looked angrily around. There was a minute of gloomysilence. Raskolnikov turned to go.
“Are you going already?” Porfiry said amiably, holding out his hand withexcessive politeness. “Very, very glad of your acquaintance. As for yourrequest, have no uneasiness, write just as I told you, or, better still,come to me there yourself in a day or two... to-morrow, indeed. I shallbe there at eleven o’clock for certain. We’ll arrange it all; we’ll havea talk. As one of the last to be _there_, you might perhaps be able totell us something,” he added with a most good-natured expression.
“You want to cross-examine me officially in due form?” Raskolnikov askedsharply.
“Oh, why? That’s not necessary for the present. You misunderstand me.I lose no opportunity, you see, and... I’ve talked with all who hadpledges.... I obtained evidence from some of them, and you are thelast.... Yes, by the way,” he cried, seemingly suddenly delighted, “Ijust remember, what was I thinking of?” he turned to Razumihin, “youwere talking my ears off about that Nikolay... of course, I know, I knowvery well,” he turned to Raskolnikov, “that the fellow is innocent, butwhat is one to do? We had to trouble Dmitri too.... This is the point,this is all: when you went up the stairs it was past seven, wasn’t it?”
“Yes,” answered Raskolnikov, with an unpleasant sensation at the verymoment he spoke that he need not have said it.
“Then when you went upstairs between seven and eight, didn’t you see ina flat that stood open on a second storey, do you remember? two workmenor at least one of them? They were painting there, didn’t you noticethem? It’s very, very important for them.”
“Painters? No, I didn’t see them,” Raskolnikov answered slowly, asthough ransacking his memory, while at the same instant he was rackingevery nerve, almost swooning with anxiety to conjecture as quickly aspossible where the trap lay and not to overlook anything. “No, I didn’tsee them, and I don’t think I noticed a flat like that open.... But onthe fourth storey” (he had mastered the trap now and was triumphant)“I remember now that someone was moving out of the flat opposite AlyonaIvanovna’s.... I remember... I remember it clearly. Some porterswere carrying out a sofa and they squeezed me against the wall. Butpainters... no, I don’t remember that there were any painters, and Idon’t think that there was a flat open anywhere, no, there wasn’t.”
“What do you mean?” Razumihin shouted suddenly, as though he hadreflected and realised. “Why, it was on the day of the murder thepainters were at work, and he was there three days before? What are youasking?”
“Foo! I have muddled it!” Porfiry slapped himself on the forehead.“Deuce take it! This business is turning my brain!” he addressedRaskolnikov somewhat apologetically. “It would be such a great thing forus to find out whether anyone had seen them between seven and eight atthe flat, so I fancied you could perhaps have told us something.... Iquite muddled it.”
“Then you should be more careful,” Razumihin observed grimly.
The last words were uttered in the passage. Porfiry Petrovitch saw themto the door with excessive politeness.
They went out into the street gloomy and sullen, and for some steps theydid not say a word. Raskolnikov drew a deep breath.
CHAPTER VI
“I don’t believe it, I can’t believe it!” repeated Razumihin, trying inperplexity to refute Raskolnikov’s arguments.
They were by now approaching Bakaleyev’s lodgings, where PulcheriaAlexandrovna and Dounia had been expecting them a long while. Razumihinkept stopping on the way in the heat of discussion, confused and excitedby the very fact that they were for the first time speaking openly about_it_.
“Don’t believe it, then!” answered Raskolnikov, with a cold, carelesssmile. “You were noticing nothing as usual, but I was weighing everyword.”
“You are suspicious. That is why you weighed their words... h’m...certainly, I agree, Porfiry’s tone was rather strange, and stillmore that wretch Zametov!... You are right, there was something abouthim--but why? Why?”
“He has changed his mind since last night.”
“Quite the contrary! If they had that brainless idea, they would dotheir utmost to hide it, and conceal their cards, so as to catch youafterwards.... But it was all impudent and careless.”
“If they had had facts--I mean, real facts--or at least grounds forsuspicion, then they would certainly have tried to hide their game,in the hope of getting more (they would have made a search long agobesides). But they have no facts, not one. It is all mirage--allambiguous. Simply a floating idea. So they try to throw me out byimpudence. And perhaps, he was irritated at having no facts, and blurtedit out in his vexation--or perhaps he has some plan... he seems anintelligent man. Perhaps he wanted to frighten me by pretending toknow. They have a psychology of their own, brother. But it is loathsomeexplaining it all. Stop!”
“And it’s insulting, insulting! I understand you. But... since we havespoken openly now (and it is an excellent thing that we have at last--Iam glad) I will own now frankly that I noticed it in them long ago,this idea. Of course the merest hint only--an insinuation--but why aninsinuation even? How dare they? What foundation have they? If only youknew how furious I have been. Think only! Simply because a poor student,unhinged by poverty and hypochondria, on the eve of a severe deliriousillness (note that), suspicious, vain, proud, who has not seen a soul tospeak to for six months, in rags and in boots without soles, has toface some wretched policemen and put up with their insolence; andthe unexpected debt thrust under his nose, the I.O.U. presentedby Tchebarov, the new paint, thirty degrees Reaumur and a stiflingatmosphere, a crowd of people, the talk about the murder of a personwhere he had been just before, and all that on an empty stomach--hemight well have a fainting fit! And that, that is what they found itall on! Damn them! I understand how annoying it is, but in your place,Rodya, I would laugh at them, or better still, spit in their ugly faces,and spit a dozen times in all directions. I’d hit out in alldirections, neatly too, and so I’d put an end to it. Damn them! Don’t bedownhearted. It’s a shame!”
“He really has put it well, though,” Raskolnikov thought.
“Damn them? But the cross-examination again, to-morrow?” he said withbitterness. “Must I really enter into explanations with them? I feelvexed as it is, that I condescended to speak to Zametov yesterday in therestaurant....”
“Damn it! I will go myself to Porfiry. I will squeeze it out of him, asone of the family: he must let me know the ins and outs of it all! Andas for Zametov...”
“At last he sees through him!” thought Raskolnikov.
“Stay!” cried Razumihin, seizing him by the shoulder again. “Stay! youwere wrong. I have thought it out. You are wrong! How was that a trap?You say that the question about the workmen was a trap. But if you haddone _that_, could you have said you had seen them painting the flat...and the workmen? On the contrary, you would have seen nothing, even ifyou had seen it. Who would own it against himself?”
“If I had done _that thing_, I should certainly have said that I hadseen the workmen and the flat,” Raskolnikov answered, with reluctanceand obvious disgust.
“But why speak against yourself?”
“Because only peasants, or the most inexperienced novices denyeverything flatly at examinations. If a man is ever so little developedand experienced, he will certainly try to admit all the external factsthat can’t be avoided, but will seek other explanations of them, willintroduce some special, unexpected turn, that will give them anothersignificance and put them in another light. Porfiry might well reckonthat I should be sure to answer so, and say I had seen them to give anair of truth, and then make some explanation.”
“But he would have told you at once that the workmen could not have beenthere two days before, and that therefore you must have been there onthe day of the murder at eight o’clock. And so he would have caught youover a detail.”
“Yes, that is what he was reckoning on, that I should not have time toreflect, and should be in a hurry to make the most likely answer, andso would forget that the workmen could not have been there two daysbefore.”
“But how could you forget it?”
“Nothing easier. It is in just such stupid things clever people are mosteasily caught. The more cunning a man is, the less he suspects that hewill be caught in a simple thing. The more cunning a man is, the simplerthe trap he must be caught in. Porfiry is not such a fool as youthink....”
“He is a knave then, if that is so!”
Raskolnikov could not help laughing. But at the very moment, he wasstruck by the strangeness of his own frankness, and the eagernesswith which he had made this explanation, though he had kept up all thepreceding conversation with gloomy repulsion, obviously with a motive,from necessity.
“I am getting a relish for certain aspects!” he thought to himself.But almost at the same instant he became suddenly uneasy, as though anunexpected and alarming idea had occurred to him. His uneasiness kept onincreasing. They had just reached the entrance to Bakaleyev’s.
“Go in alone!” said Raskolnikov suddenly. “I will be back directly.”
“Where are you going? Why, we are just here.”
“I can’t help it.... I will come in half an hour. Tell them.”
“Say what you like, I will come with you.”
“You, too, want to torture me!” he screamed, with such bitterirritation, such despair in his eyes that Razumihin’s hands dropped.He stood for some time on the steps, looking gloomily at Raskolnikovstriding rapidly away in the direction of his lodging. At last, grittinghis teeth and clenching his fist, he swore he would squeeze Porfirylike a lemon that very day, and went up the stairs to reassure PulcheriaAlexandrovna, who was by now alarmed at their long absence.
When Raskolnikov got home, his hair was soaked with sweat and he wasbreathing heavily. He went rapidly up the stairs, walked into hisunlocked room and at once fastened the latch. Then in senseless terrorhe rushed to the corner, to that hole under the paper where he had putthe things; put his hand in, and for some minutes felt carefully in thehole, in every crack and fold of the paper. Finding nothing, he got upand drew a deep breath. As he was reaching the steps of Bakaleyev’s, hesuddenly fancied that something, a chain, a stud or even a bit of paperin which they had been wrapped with the old woman’s handwriting on it,might somehow have slipped out and been lost in some crack, and thenmight suddenly turn up as unexpected, conclusive evidence against him.
He stood as though lost in thought, and a strange, humiliated, halfsenseless smile strayed on his lips. He took his cap at last and wentquietly out of the room. His ideas were all tangled. He went dreamilythrough the gateway.
“Here he is himself,” shouted a loud voice.
He raised his head.
The porter was standing at the door of his little room and was pointinghim out to a short man who looked like an artisan, wearing a long coatand a waistcoat, and looking at a distance remarkably like a woman. Hestooped, and his head in a greasy cap hung forward. From his wrinkledflabby face he looked over fifty; his little eyes were lost in fat andthey looked out grimly, sternly and discontentedly.
“What is it?” Raskolnikov asked, going up to the porter.
The man stole a look at him from under his brows and he looked at himattentively, deliberately; then he turned slowly and went out of thegate into the street without saying a word.
“What is it?” cried Raskolnikov.
“Why, he there was asking whether a student lived here, mentioned yourname and whom you lodged with. I saw you coming and pointed you out andhe went away. It’s funny.”
The porter too seemed rather puzzled, but not much so, and afterwondering for a moment he turned and went back to his room.
Raskolnikov ran after the stranger, and at once caught sight ofhim walking along the other side of the street with the same even,deliberate step with his eyes fixed on the ground, as though inmeditation. He soon overtook him, but for some time walked behind him.At last, moving on to a level with him, he looked at his face. The mannoticed him at once, looked at him quickly, but dropped his eyes again;and so they walked for a minute side by side without uttering a word.
“You were inquiring for me... of the porter?” Raskolnikov said at last,but in a curiously quiet voice.
The man made no answer; he didn’t even look at him. Again they were bothsilent.
“Why do you... come and ask for me... and say nothing.... What’s themeaning of it?”
Raskolnikov’s voice broke and he seemed unable to articulate the wordsclearly.
The man raised his eyes this time and turned a gloomy sinister look atRaskolnikov.
“Murderer!” he said suddenly in a quiet but clear and distinct voice.
Raskolnikov went on walking beside him. His legs felt suddenly weak, acold shiver ran down his spine, and his heart seemed to stand still fora moment, then suddenly began throbbing as though it were set free. Sothey walked for about a hundred paces, side by side in silence.
The man did not look at him.
“What do you mean... what is.... Who is a murderer?” mutteredRaskolnikov hardly audibly.
“_You_ are a murderer,” the man answered still more articulately andemphatically, with a smile of triumphant hatred, and again he lookedstraight into Raskolnikov’s pale face and stricken eyes.
They had just reached the cross-roads. The man turned to the leftwithout looking behind him. Raskolnikov remained standing, gazing afterhim. He saw him turn round fifty paces away and look back at him stillstanding there. Raskolnikov could not see clearly, but he fancied thathe was again smiling the same smile of cold hatred and triumph.
With slow faltering steps, with shaking knees, Raskolnikov made his wayback to his little garret, feeling chilled all over. He took off his capand put it on the table, and for ten minutes he stood without moving.Then he sank exhausted on the sofa and with a weak moan of pain hestretched himself on it. So he lay for half an hour.
He thought of nothing. Some thoughts or fragments of thoughts, someimages without order or coherence floated before his mind--faces ofpeople he had seen in his childhood or met somewhere once, whom he wouldnever have recalled, the belfry of the church at V., the billiard tablein a restaurant and some officers playing billiards, the smell of cigarsin some underground tobacco shop, a tavern room, a back staircase quitedark, all sloppy with dirty water and strewn with egg-shells, and theSunday bells floating in from somewhere.... The images followed oneanother, whirling like a hurricane. Some of them he liked and triedto clutch at, but they faded and all the while there was an oppressionwithin him, but it was not overwhelming, sometimes it was evenpleasant.... The slight shivering still persisted, but that toowas an almost pleasant sensation.
He heard the hurried footsteps of Razumihin; he closed his eyes andpretended to be asleep. Razumihin opened the door and stood for sometime in the doorway as though hesitating, then he stepped softly intothe room and went cautiously to the sofa. Raskolnikov heard Nastasya’swhisper:
“Don’t disturb him! Let him sleep. He can have his dinner later.”
“Quite so,” answered Razumihin. Both withdrew carefully and closed thedoor. Another half-hour passed. Raskolnikov opened his eyes, turned onhis back again, clasping his hands behind his head.
“Who is he? Who is that man who sprang out of the earth? Where was he,what did he see? He has seen it all, that’s clear. Where was he then?And from where did he see? Why has he only now sprung out of the earth?And how could he see? Is it possible? Hm...” continued Raskolnikov,turning cold and shivering, “and the jewel case Nikolay found behind thedoor--was that possible? A clue? You miss an infinitesimal line and youcan build it into a pyramid of evidence! A fly flew by and saw it! Is itpossible?” He felt with sudden loathing how weak, how physically weak hehad become. “I ought to have known it,” he thought with a bitter smile.“And how dared I, knowing myself, knowing how I should be, take up anaxe and shed blood! I ought to have known beforehand.... Ah, but I didknow!” he whispered in despair. At times he came to a standstill at somethought.
“No, those men are not made so. The real _Master_ to whom all ispermitted storms Toulon, makes a massacre in Paris, _forgets_ an army inEgypt, _wastes_ half a million men in the Moscow expedition and gets offwith a jest at Vilna. And altars are set up to him after his death, andso _all_ is permitted. No, such people, it seems, are not of flesh butof bronze!”
One sudden irrelevant idea almost made him laugh. Napoleon, thepyramids, Waterloo, and a wretched skinny old woman, a pawnbroker witha red trunk under her bed--it’s a nice hash for Porfiry Petrovitch todigest! How can they digest it! It’s too inartistic. “A Napoleon creepunder an old woman’s bed! Ugh, how loathsome!”
At moments he felt he was raving. He sank into a state of feverishexcitement. “The old woman is of no consequence,” he thought, hotly andincoherently. “The old woman was a mistake perhaps, but she is notwhat matters! The old woman was only an illness.... I was in a hurry tooverstep.... I didn’t kill a human being, but a principle! I killed theprinciple, but I didn’t overstep, I stopped on this side.... I wasonly capable of killing. And it seems I wasn’t even capable of that...Principle? Why was that fool Razumihin abusing the socialists? They areindustrious, commercial people; ‘the happiness of all’ is their case.No, life is only given to me once and I shall never have it again; Idon’t want to wait for ‘the happiness of all.’ I want to live myself,or else better not live at all. I simply couldn’t pass by my motherstarving, keeping my rouble in my pocket while I waited for the‘happiness of all.’ I am putting my little brick into the happiness ofall and so my heart is at peace. Ha-ha! Why have you let me slip? I onlylive once, I too want.... Ech, I am an æsthetic louse and nothingmore,” he added suddenly, laughing like a madman. “Yes, I am certainly alouse,” he went on, clutching at the idea, gloating over it and playingwith it with vindictive pleasure. “In the first place, because I canreason that I am one, and secondly, because for a month past I have beentroubling benevolent Providence, calling it to witness that not formy own fleshly lusts did I undertake it, but with a grand and nobleobject--ha-ha! Thirdly, because I aimed at carrying it out as justly aspossible, weighing, measuring and calculating. Of all the lice I pickedout the most useless one and proposed to take from her only as much as Ineeded for the first step, no more nor less (so the rest would have goneto a monastery, according to her will, ha-ha!). And what shows that Iam utterly a louse,” he added, grinding his teeth, “is that I amperhaps viler and more loathsome than the louse I killed, and _I feltbeforehand_ that I should tell myself so _after_ killing her. Cananything be compared with the horror of that? The vulgarity! Theabjectness! I understand the ‘prophet’ with his sabre, on his steed:Allah commands and ‘trembling’ creation must obey! The ‘prophet’ isright, he is right when he sets a battery across the street and blows upthe innocent and the guilty without deigning to explain! It’s for you toobey, trembling creation, and not _to have desires_, for that’s not foryou!... I shall never, never forgive the old woman!”
His hair was soaked with sweat, his quivering lips were parched, hiseyes were fixed on the ceiling.
“Mother, sister--how I loved them! Why do I hate them now? Yes, I hatethem, I feel a physical hatred for them, I can’t bear them near me....I went up to my mother and kissed her, I remember.... To embrace herand think if she only knew... shall I tell her then? That’s just whatI might do.... _She_ must be the same as I am,” he added, straininghimself to think, as it were struggling with delirium. “Ah, how I hatethe old woman now! I feel I should kill her again if she came to life!Poor Lizaveta! Why did she come in?... It’s strange though, why is itI scarcely ever think of her, as though I hadn’t killed her? Lizaveta!Sonia! Poor gentle things, with gentle eyes.... Dear women! Why don’tthey weep? Why don’t they moan? They give up everything... their eyesare soft and gentle.... Sonia, Sonia! Gentle Sonia!”
He lost consciousness; it seemed strange to him that he didn’t rememberhow he got into the street. It was late evening. The twilight had fallenand the full moon was shining more and more brightly; but there was apeculiar breathlessness in the air. There were crowds of people in thestreet; workmen and business people were making their way home; otherpeople had come out for a walk; there was a smell of mortar, dust andstagnant water. Raskolnikov walked along, mournful and anxious; he wasdistinctly aware of having come out with a purpose, of having to dosomething in a hurry, but what it was he had forgotten. Suddenly hestood still and saw a man standing on the other side of the street,beckoning to him. He crossed over to him, but at once the man turned andwalked away with his head hanging, as though he had made no sign tohim. “Stay, did he really beckon?” Raskolnikov wondered, but he triedto overtake him. When he was within ten paces he recognised him andwas frightened; it was the same man with stooping shoulders in the longcoat. Raskolnikov followed him at a distance; his heart was beating;they went down a turning; the man still did not look round. “Does heknow I am following him?” thought Raskolnikov. The man went into thegateway of a big house. Raskolnikov hastened to the gate and looked into see whether he would look round and sign to him. In the court-yardthe man did turn round and again seemed to beckon him. Raskolnikov atonce followed him into the yard, but the man was gone. He must havegone up the first staircase. Raskolnikov rushed after him. He heardslow measured steps two flights above. The staircase seemed strangelyfamiliar. He reached the window on the first floor; the moon shonethrough the panes with a melancholy and mysterious light; then hereached the second floor. Bah! this is the flat where the painters wereat work... but how was it he did not recognise it at once? The stepsof the man above had died away. “So he must have stopped or hiddensomewhere.” He reached the third storey, should he go on? There was astillness that was dreadful.... But he went on. The sound of his ownfootsteps scared and frightened him. How dark it was! The man must behiding in some corner here. Ah! the flat was standing wide open, hehesitated and went in. It was very dark and empty in the passage, asthough everything had been removed; he crept on tiptoe into the parlourwhich was flooded with moonlight. Everything there was as before, thechairs, the looking-glass, the yellow sofa and the pictures in theframes. A huge, round, copper-red moon looked in at the windows.“It’s the moon that makes it so still, weaving some mystery,” thoughtRaskolnikov. He stood and waited, waited a long while, and the moresilent the moonlight, the more violently his heart beat, till it waspainful. And still the same hush. Suddenly he heard a momentary sharpcrack like the snapping of a splinter and all was still again. A flyflew up suddenly and struck the window pane with a plaintive buzz. Atthat moment he noticed in the corner between the window and the littlecupboard something like a cloak hanging on the wall. “Why is that cloakhere?” he thought, “it wasn’t there before....” He went up to it quietlyand felt that there was someone hiding behind it. He cautiously movedthe cloak and saw, sitting on a chair in the corner, the old woman bentdouble so that he couldn’t see her face; but it was she. He stood overher. “She is afraid,” he thought. He stealthily took the axe from thenoose and struck her one blow, then another on the skull. But strangeto say she did not stir, as though she were made of wood. He wasfrightened, bent down nearer and tried to look at her; but she, too,bent her head lower. He bent right down to the ground and peeped upinto her face from below, he peeped and turned cold with horror: the oldwoman was sitting and laughing, shaking with noiseless laughter, doingher utmost that he should not hear it. Suddenly he fancied that the doorfrom the bedroom was opened a little and that there was laughter andwhispering within. He was overcome with frenzy and he began hitting theold woman on the head with all his force, but at every blow of the axethe laughter and whispering from the bedroom grew louder and the oldwoman was simply shaking with mirth. He was rushing away, but thepassage was full of people, the doors of the flats stood open and on thelanding, on the stairs and everywhere below there were people, rows ofheads, all looking, but huddled together in silence and expectation.Something gripped his heart, his legs were rooted to the spot, theywould not move.... He tried to scream and woke up.
He drew a deep breath--but his dream seemed strangely to persist:his door was flung open and a man whom he had never seen stood in thedoorway watching him intently.
Raskolnikov had hardly opened his eyes and he instantly closed themagain. He lay on his back without stirring.
“Is it still a dream?” he wondered and again raised his eyelids hardlyperceptibly; the stranger was standing in the same place, still watchinghim.
He stepped cautiously into the room, carefully closing the door afterhim, went up to the table, paused a moment, still keeping his eyes onRaskolnikov, and noiselessly seated himself on the chair by the sofa; heput his hat on the floor beside him and leaned his hands on his caneand his chin on his hands. It was evident that he was prepared to waitindefinitely. As far as Raskolnikov could make out from his stolenglances, he was a man no longer young, stout, with a full, fair, almostwhitish beard.
Ten minutes passed. It was still light, but beginning to get dusk. Therewas complete stillness in the room. Not a sound came from the stairs.Only a big fly buzzed and fluttered against the window pane. It wasunbearable at last. Raskolnikov suddenly got up and sat on the sofa.
“Come, tell me what you want.”
“I knew you were not asleep, but only pretending,” the stranger answeredoddly, laughing calmly. “Arkady Ivanovitch Svidrigaïlov, allow me tointroduce myself....”
