PART IV
CHAPTER I
“Can this be still a dream?” Raskolnikov thought once more.
He looked carefully and suspiciously at the unexpected visitor.
“Svidrigaïlov! What nonsense! It can’t be!” he said at last aloud inbewilderment.
His visitor did not seem at all surprised at this exclamation.
“I’ve come to you for two reasons. In the first place, I wanted to makeyour personal acquaintance, as I have already heard a great deal aboutyou that is interesting and flattering; secondly, I cherish the hopethat you may not refuse to assist me in a matter directly concerning thewelfare of your sister, Avdotya Romanovna. For without your support shemight not let me come near her now, for she is prejudiced against me,but with your assistance I reckon on...”
“You reckon wrongly,” interrupted Raskolnikov.
“They only arrived yesterday, may I ask you?”
Raskolnikov made no reply.
“It was yesterday, I know. I only arrived myself the day before. Well,let me tell you this, Rodion Romanovitch, I don’t consider it necessaryto justify myself, but kindly tell me what was there particularlycriminal on my part in all this business, speaking without prejudice,with common sense?”
Raskolnikov continued to look at him in silence.
“That in my own house I persecuted a defenceless girl and ‘insulted herwith my infamous proposals’--is that it? (I am anticipating you.) Butyou’ve only to assume that I, too, am a man _et nihil humanum_... in aword, that I am capable of being attracted and falling in love (whichdoes not depend on our will), then everything can be explained in themost natural manner. The question is, am I a monster, or am I myselfa victim? And what if I am a victim? In proposing to the object of mypassion to elope with me to America or Switzerland, I may have cherishedthe deepest respect for her and may have thought that I was promotingour mutual happiness! Reason is the slave of passion, you know; why,probably, I was doing more harm to myself than anyone!”
“But that’s not the point,” Raskolnikov interrupted with disgust. “It’ssimply that whether you are right or wrong, we dislike you. We don’twant to have anything to do with you. We show you the door. Go out!”
Svidrigaïlov broke into a sudden laugh.
“But you’re... but there’s no getting round you,” he said, laughing inthe frankest way. “I hoped to get round you, but you took up the rightline at once!”
“But you are trying to get round me still!”
“What of it? What of it?” cried Svidrigaïlov, laughing openly. “But thisis what the French call _bonne guerre_, and the most innocent form ofdeception!... But still you have interrupted me; one way or another, Irepeat again: there would never have been any unpleasantness except forwhat happened in the garden. Marfa Petrovna...”
“You have got rid of Marfa Petrovna, too, so they say?” Raskolnikovinterrupted rudely.
“Oh, you’ve heard that, too, then? You’d be sure to, though.... Butas for your question, I really don’t know what to say, though my ownconscience is quite at rest on that score. Don’t suppose that I am inany apprehension about it. All was regular and in order; the medicalinquiry diagnosed apoplexy due to bathing immediately after a heavydinner and a bottle of wine, and indeed it could have proved nothingelse. But I’ll tell you what I have been thinking to myself of late, onmy way here in the train, especially: didn’t I contribute to all that...calamity, morally, in a way, by irritation or something of thesort. But I came to the conclusion that that, too, was quite out of thequestion.”
Raskolnikov laughed.
“I wonder you trouble yourself about it!”
“But what are you laughing at? Only consider, I struck her just twicewith a switch--there were no marks even... don’t regard me as a cynic,please; I am perfectly aware how atrocious it was of me and all that;but I know for certain, too, that Marfa Petrovna was very likely pleasedat my, so to say, warmth. The story of your sister had been wrung out tothe last drop; for the last three days Marfa Petrovna had been forced tosit at home; she had nothing to show herself with in the town. Besides,she had bored them so with that letter (you heard about her reading theletter). And all of a sudden those two switches fell from heaven! Herfirst act was to order the carriage to be got out.... Not to speakof the fact that there are cases when women are very, very glad to beinsulted in spite of all their show of indignation. There are instancesof it with everyone; human beings in general, indeed, greatly love tobe insulted, have you noticed that? But it’s particularly so with women.One might even say it’s their only amusement.”
At one time Raskolnikov thought of getting up and walking out and sofinishing the interview. But some curiosity and even a sort of prudencemade him linger for a moment.
“You are fond of fighting?” he asked carelessly.
“No, not very,” Svidrigaïlov answered, calmly. “And Marfa Petrovna andI scarcely ever fought. We lived very harmoniously, and she was alwayspleased with me. I only used the whip twice in all our seven years (notcounting a third occasion of a very ambiguous character). The firsttime, two months after our marriage, immediately after we arrived in thecountry, and the last time was that of which we are speaking. Did yousuppose I was such a monster, such a reactionary, such a slave driver?Ha, ha! By the way, do you remember, Rodion Romanovitch, how a few yearsago, in those days of beneficent publicity, a nobleman, I’ve forgottenhis name, was put to shame everywhere, in all the papers, for havingthrashed a German woman in the railway train. You remember? It was inthose days, that very year I believe, the ‘disgraceful action of the_Age_’ took place (you know, ‘The Egyptian Nights,’ that public reading,you remember? The dark eyes, you know! Ah, the golden days of our youth,where are they?). Well, as for the gentleman who thrashed the German,I feel no sympathy with him, because after all what need is therefor sympathy? But I must say that there are sometimes such provoking‘Germans’ that I don’t believe there is a progressive who could quiteanswer for himself. No one looked at the subject from that point of viewthen, but that’s the truly humane point of view, I assure you.”
After saying this, Svidrigaïlov broke into a sudden laugh again.Raskolnikov saw clearly that this was a man with a firm purpose in hismind and able to keep it to himself.
“I expect you’ve not talked to anyone for some days?” he asked.
“Scarcely anyone. I suppose you are wondering at my being such anadaptable man?”
“No, I am only wondering at your being too adaptable a man.”
“Because I am not offended at the rudeness of your questions? Is thatit? But why take offence? As you asked, so I answered,” he replied,with a surprising expression of simplicity. “You know, there’shardly anything I take interest in,” he went on, as it were dreamily,“especially now, I’ve nothing to do.... You are quite at liberty toimagine though that I am making up to you with a motive, particularly asI told you I want to see your sister about something. But I’ll confessfrankly, I am very much bored. The last three days especially, so I amdelighted to see you.... Don’t be angry, Rodion Romanovitch, but youseem to be somehow awfully strange yourself. Say what you like, there’ssomething wrong with you, and now, too... not this very minute, I mean,but now, generally.... Well, well, I won’t, I won’t, don’t scowl! I amnot such a bear, you know, as you think.”
Raskolnikov looked gloomily at him.
“You are not a bear, perhaps, at all,” he said. “I fancy indeed thatyou are a man of very good breeding, or at least know how on occasion tobehave like one.”
“I am not particularly interested in anyone’s opinion,” Svidrigaïlovanswered, dryly and even with a shade of haughtiness, “and therefore whynot be vulgar at times when vulgarity is such a convenient cloak for ourclimate... and especially if one has a natural propensity that way,” headded, laughing again.
“But I’ve heard you have many friends here. You are, as they say, ‘notwithout connections.’ What can you want with me, then, unless you’vesome special object?”
“That’s true that I have friends here,” Svidrigaïlov admitted, notreplying to the chief point. “I’ve met some already. I’ve been loungingabout for the last three days, and I’ve seen them, or they’ve seen me.That’s a matter of course. I am well dressed and reckoned not a poorman; the emancipation of the serfs hasn’t affected me; my propertyconsists chiefly of forests and water meadows. The revenue has notfallen off; but... I am not going to see them, I was sick of them longago. I’ve been here three days and have called on no one.... What a townit is! How has it come into existence among us, tell me that? A town ofofficials and students of all sorts. Yes, there’s a great deal I didn’tnotice when I was here eight years ago, kicking up my heels.... My onlyhope now is in anatomy, by Jove, it is!”
“Anatomy?”
“But as for these clubs, Dussauts, parades, or progress, indeed,maybe--well, all that can go on without me,” he went on, again withoutnoticing the question. “Besides, who wants to be a card-sharper?”
“Why, have you been a card-sharper then?”
“How could I help being? There was a regular set of us, men of the bestsociety, eight years ago; we had a fine time. And all men of breeding,you know, poets, men of property. And indeed as a rule in our Russiansociety the best manners are found among those who’ve been thrashed,have you noticed that? I’ve deteriorated in the country. But I did getinto prison for debt, through a low Greek who came from Nezhin. ThenMarfa Petrovna turned up; she bargained with him and bought me off forthirty thousand silver pieces (I owed seventy thousand). We were unitedin lawful wedlock and she bore me off into the country like a treasure.You know she was five years older than I. She was very fond of me. Forseven years I never left the country. And, take note, that all my lifeshe held a document over me, the IOU for thirty thousand roubles, soif I were to elect to be restive about anything I should be trapped atonce! And she would have done it! Women find nothing incompatible inthat.”
“If it hadn’t been for that, would you have given her the slip?”
“I don’t know what to say. It was scarcely the document restrained me. Ididn’t want to go anywhere else. Marfa Petrovna herself invited me to goabroad, seeing I was bored, but I’ve been abroad before, and alwaysfelt sick there. For no reason, but the sunrise, the bay of Naples, thesea--you look at them and it makes you sad. What’s most revolting isthat one is really sad! No, it’s better at home. Here at least oneblames others for everything and excuses oneself. I should have goneperhaps on an expedition to the North Pole, because _j’ai le vinmauvais_ and hate drinking, and there’s nothing left but wine. I havetried it. But, I say, I’ve been told Berg is going up in a great balloonnext Sunday from the Yusupov Garden and will take up passengers at afee. Is it true?”
“Why, would you go up?”
“I... No, oh, no,” muttered Svidrigaïlov really seeming to be deep inthought.
“What does he mean? Is he in earnest?” Raskolnikov wondered.
“No, the document didn’t restrain me,” Svidrigaïlov went on,meditatively. “It was my own doing, not leaving the country, and nearlya year ago Marfa Petrovna gave me back the document on my name-dayand made me a present of a considerable sum of money, too. She had afortune, you know. ‘You see how I trust you, Arkady Ivanovitch’--thatwas actually her expression. You don’t believe she used it? But doyou know I managed the estate quite decently, they know me in theneighbourhood. I ordered books, too. Marfa Petrovna at first approved,but afterwards she was afraid of my over-studying.”
“You seem to be missing Marfa Petrovna very much?”
“Missing her? Perhaps. Really, perhaps I am. And, by the way, do youbelieve in ghosts?”
“What ghosts?”
“Why, ordinary ghosts.”
“Do you believe in them?”
“Perhaps not, _pour vous plaire_.... I wouldn’t say no exactly.”
“Do you see them, then?”
Svidrigaïlov looked at him rather oddly.
“Marfa Petrovna is pleased to visit me,” he said, twisting his mouthinto a strange smile.
“How do you mean ‘she is pleased to visit you’?”
“She has been three times. I saw her first on the very day of thefuneral, an hour after she was buried. It was the day before I left tocome here. The second time was the day before yesterday, at daybreak, onthe journey at the station of Malaya Vishera, and the third time was twohours ago in the room where I am staying. I was alone.”
“Were you awake?”
“Quite awake. I was wide awake every time. She comes, speaks to me fora minute and goes out at the door--always at the door. I can almost hearher.”
“What made me think that something of the sort must be happening toyou?” Raskolnikov said suddenly.
At the same moment he was surprised at having said it. He was muchexcited.
“What! Did you think so?” Svidrigaïlov asked in astonishment. “Did youreally? Didn’t I say that there was something in common between us, eh?”
“You never said so!” Raskolnikov cried sharply and with heat.
“Didn’t I?”
“No!”
“I thought I did. When I came in and saw you lying with your eyes shut,pretending, I said to myself at once, ‘Here’s the man.’”
“What do you mean by ‘the man?’ What are you talking about?” criedRaskolnikov.
“What do I mean? I really don’t know....” Svidrigaïlov mutteredingenuously, as though he, too, were puzzled.
For a minute they were silent. They stared in each other’s faces.
“That’s all nonsense!” Raskolnikov shouted with vexation. “What does shesay when she comes to you?”
“She! Would you believe it, she talks of the silliest trifles and--manis a strange creature--it makes me angry. The first time she came in (Iwas tired you know: the funeral service, the funeral ceremony, the lunchafterwards. At last I was left alone in my study. I lighted a cigar andbegan to think), she came in at the door. ‘You’ve been so busy to-day,Arkady Ivanovitch, you have forgotten to wind the dining-room clock,’she said. All those seven years I’ve wound that clock every week, and ifI forgot it she would always remind me. The next day I set off on my wayhere. I got out at the station at daybreak; I’d been asleep, tired out,with my eyes half open, I was drinking some coffee. I looked up andthere was suddenly Marfa Petrovna sitting beside me with a pack ofcards in her hands. ‘Shall I tell your fortune for the journey, ArkadyIvanovitch?’ She was a great hand at telling fortunes. I shall neverforgive myself for not asking her to. I ran away in a fright, and,besides, the bell rang. I was sitting to-day, feeling very heavy after amiserable dinner from a cookshop; I was sitting smoking, all of a suddenMarfa Petrovna again. She came in very smart in a new green silk dresswith a long train. ‘Good day, Arkady Ivanovitch! How do you like mydress? Aniska can’t make like this.’ (Aniska was a dressmaker in thecountry, one of our former serf girls who had been trained in Moscow, apretty wench.) She stood turning round before me. I looked at the dress,and then I looked carefully, very carefully, at her face. ‘I wonderyou trouble to come to me about such trifles, Marfa Petrovna.’ ‘Goodgracious, you won’t let one disturb you about anything!’ To tease herI said, ‘I want to get married, Marfa Petrovna.’ ‘That’s just like you,Arkady Ivanovitch; it does you very little credit to come looking for abride when you’ve hardly buried your wife. And if you could make a goodchoice, at least, but I know it won’t be for your happiness or hers, youwill only be a laughing-stock to all good people.’ Then she went out andher train seemed to rustle. Isn’t it nonsense, eh?”
“But perhaps you are telling lies?” Raskolnikov put in.
“I rarely lie,” answered Svidrigaïlov thoughtfully, apparently notnoticing the rudeness of the question.
“And in the past, have you ever seen ghosts before?”
“Y-yes, I have seen them, but only once in my life, six years ago. I hada serf, Filka; just after his burial I called out forgetting ‘Filka, mypipe!’ He came in and went to the cupboard where my pipes were. I satstill and thought ‘he is doing it out of revenge,’ because we had aviolent quarrel just before his death. ‘How dare you come in with a holein your elbow?’ I said. ‘Go away, you scamp!’ He turned and went out,and never came again. I didn’t tell Marfa Petrovna at the time. I wantedto have a service sung for him, but I was ashamed.”
“You should go to a doctor.”
“I know I am not well, without your telling me, though I don’t knowwhat’s wrong; I believe I am five times as strong as you are. I didn’task you whether you believe that ghosts are seen, but whether youbelieve that they exist.”
“No, I won’t believe it!” Raskolnikov cried, with positive anger.
“What do people generally say?” muttered Svidrigaïlov, as thoughspeaking to himself, looking aside and bowing his head. “They say, ‘Youare ill, so what appears to you is only unreal fantasy.’ But that’s notstrictly logical. I agree that ghosts only appear to the sick, but thatonly proves that they are unable to appear except to the sick, not thatthey don’t exist.”
“Nothing of the sort,” Raskolnikov insisted irritably.
“No? You don’t think so?” Svidrigaïlov went on, looking at himdeliberately. “But what do you say to this argument (help me withit): ghosts are, as it were, shreds and fragments of other worlds, thebeginning of them. A man in health has, of course, no reason to seethem, because he is above all a man of this earth and is bound for thesake of completeness and order to live only in this life. But as soonas one is ill, as soon as the normal earthly order of the organism isbroken, one begins to realise the possibility of another world; and themore seriously ill one is, the closer becomes one’s contact with thatother world, so that as soon as the man dies he steps straight into thatworld. I thought of that long ago. If you believe in a future life, youcould believe in that, too.”
“I don’t believe in a future life,” said Raskolnikov.
Svidrigaïlov sat lost in thought.
“And what if there are only spiders there, or something of that sort,”he said suddenly.
“He is a madman,” thought Raskolnikov.
“We always imagine eternity as something beyond our conception,something vast, vast! But why must it be vast? Instead of all that, whatif it’s one little room, like a bath house in the country, blackand grimy and spiders in every corner, and that’s all eternity is? Isometimes fancy it like that.”
“Can it be you can imagine nothing juster and more comforting thanthat?” Raskolnikov cried, with a feeling of anguish.
“Juster? And how can we tell, perhaps that is just, and do you knowit’s what I would certainly have made it,” answered Svidrigaïlov, with avague smile.
This horrible answer sent a cold chill through Raskolnikov. Svidrigaïlovraised his head, looked at him, and suddenly began laughing.
“Only think,” he cried, “half an hour ago we had never seen each other,we regarded each other as enemies; there is a matter unsettled betweenus; we’ve thrown it aside, and away we’ve gone into the abstract! Wasn’tI right in saying that we were birds of a feather?”
“Kindly allow me,” Raskolnikov went on irritably, “to ask you to explainwhy you have honoured me with your visit... and... and I am in a hurry,I have no time to waste. I want to go out.”
“By all means, by all means. Your sister, Avdotya Romanovna, is going tobe married to Mr. Luzhin, Pyotr Petrovitch?”
“Can you refrain from any question about my sister and from mentioningher name? I can’t understand how you dare utter her name in my presence,if you really are Svidrigaïlov.”
“Why, but I’ve come here to speak about her; how can I avoid mentioningher?”
“Very good, speak, but make haste.”
“I am sure that you must have formed your own opinion of this Mr.Luzhin, who is a connection of mine through my wife, if you have onlyseen him for half an hour, or heard any facts about him. He is nomatch for Avdotya Romanovna. I believe Avdotya Romanovna is sacrificingherself generously and imprudently for the sake of... for the sake ofher family. I fancied from all I had heard of you that you would be veryglad if the match could be broken off without the sacrifice of worldlyadvantages. Now I know you personally, I am convinced of it.”
“All this is very naïve... excuse me, I should have said impudent onyour part,” said Raskolnikov.
“You mean to say that I am seeking my own ends. Don’t be uneasy, RodionRomanovitch, if I were working for my own advantage, I would not havespoken out so directly. I am not quite a fool. I will confess somethingpsychologically curious about that: just now, defending my love forAvdotya Romanovna, I said I was myself the victim. Well, let me tell youthat I’ve no feeling of love now, not the slightest, so that I wondermyself indeed, for I really did feel something...”
“Through idleness and depravity,” Raskolnikov put in.
“I certainly am idle and depraved, but your sister has such qualitiesthat even I could not help being impressed by them. But that’s allnonsense, as I see myself now.”
“Have you seen that long?”
“I began to be aware of it before, but was only perfectly sure of it theday before yesterday, almost at the moment I arrived in Petersburg. Istill fancied in Moscow, though, that I was coming to try to get AvdotyaRomanovna’s hand and to cut out Mr. Luzhin.”
“Excuse me for interrupting you; kindly be brief, and come to the objectof your visit. I am in a hurry, I want to go out...”
“With the greatest pleasure. On arriving here and determining on acertain... journey, I should like to make some necessary preliminaryarrangements. I left my children with an aunt; they are well providedfor; and they have no need of me personally. And a nice father I shouldmake, too! I have taken nothing but what Marfa Petrovna gave me a yearago. That’s enough for me. Excuse me, I am just coming to the point.Before the journey which may come off, I want to settle Mr. Luzhin, too.It’s not that I detest him so much, but it was through him I quarrelledwith Marfa Petrovna when I learned that she had dished up this marriage.I want now to see Avdotya Romanovna through your mediation, and if youlike in your presence, to explain to her that in the first place shewill never gain anything but harm from Mr. Luzhin. Then, beggingher pardon for all past unpleasantness, to make her a present of tenthousand roubles and so assist the rupture with Mr. Luzhin, a rupture towhich I believe she is herself not disinclined, if she could see the wayto it.”
“You are certainly mad,” cried Raskolnikov not so much angered asastonished. “How dare you talk like that!”
“I knew you would scream at me; but in the first place, though I am notrich, this ten thousand roubles is perfectly free; I have absolutely noneed for it. If Avdotya Romanovna does not accept it, I shall wasteit in some more foolish way. That’s the first thing. Secondly, myconscience is perfectly easy; I make the offer with no ulterior motive.You may not believe it, but in the end Avdotya Romanovna and you willknow. The point is, that I did actually cause your sister, whom Igreatly respect, some trouble and unpleasantness, and so, sincerelyregretting it, I want--not to compensate, not to repay her for theunpleasantness, but simply to do something to her advantage, to showthat I am not, after all, privileged to do nothing but harm. If therewere a millionth fraction of self-interest in my offer, I should nothave made it so openly; and I should not have offered her ten thousandonly, when five weeks ago I offered her more, Besides, I may, perhaps,very soon marry a young lady, and that alone ought to prevent suspicionof any design on Avdotya Romanovna. In conclusion, let me say thatin marrying Mr. Luzhin, she is taking money just the same, only fromanother man. Don’t be angry, Rodion Romanovitch, think it over coollyand quietly.”
Svidrigaïlov himself was exceedingly cool and quiet as he was sayingthis.
“I beg you to say no more,” said Raskolnikov. “In any case this isunpardonable impertinence.”
“Not in the least. Then a man may do nothing but harm to his neighbourin this world, and is prevented from doing the tiniest bit of goodby trivial conventional formalities. That’s absurd. If I died, forinstance, and left that sum to your sister in my will, surely shewouldn’t refuse it?”
“Very likely she would.”
“Oh, no, indeed. However, if you refuse it, so be it, though tenthousand roubles is a capital thing to have on occasion. In any case Ibeg you to repeat what I have said to Avdotya Romanovna.”
“No, I won’t.”
“In that case, Rodion Romanovitch, I shall be obliged to try and see hermyself and worry her by doing so.”
“And if I do tell her, will you not try to see her?”
“I don’t know really what to say. I should like very much to see heronce more.”
“Don’t hope for it.”
“I’m sorry. But you don’t know me. Perhaps we may become betterfriends.”
“You think we may become friends?”
“And why not?” Svidrigaïlov said, smiling. He stood up and took his hat.“I didn’t quite intend to disturb you and I came here without reckoningon it... though I was very much struck by your face this morning.”
“Where did you see me this morning?” Raskolnikov asked uneasily.
“I saw you by chance.... I kept fancying there is something about youlike me.... But don’t be uneasy. I am not intrusive; I used to get onall right with card-sharpers, and I never bored Prince Svirbey, a greatpersonage who is a distant relation of mine, and I could write aboutRaphael’s _Madonna_ in Madam Prilukov’s album, and I never left MarfaPetrovna’s side for seven years, and I used to stay the night atViazemsky’s house in the Hay Market in the old days, and I may go up ina balloon with Berg, perhaps.”
“Oh, all right. Are you starting soon on your travels, may I ask?”
“What travels?”
“Why, on that ‘journey’; you spoke of it yourself.”
“A journey? Oh, yes. I did speak of a journey. Well, that’s a widesubject.... if only you knew what you are asking,” he added, and gavea sudden, loud, short laugh. “Perhaps I’ll get married instead of thejourney. They’re making a match for me.”
“Here?”
“Yes.”
“How have you had time for that?”
“But I am very anxious to see Avdotya Romanovna once. I earnestly begit. Well, good-bye for the present. Oh, yes. I have forgotten something.Tell your sister, Rodion Romanovitch, that Marfa Petrovna rememberedher in her will and left her three thousand roubles. That’s absolutelycertain. Marfa Petrovna arranged it a week before her death, and it wasdone in my presence. Avdotya Romanovna will be able to receive the moneyin two or three weeks.”
“Are you telling the truth?”
“Yes, tell her. Well, your servant. I am staying very near you.”
As he went out, Svidrigaïlov ran up against Razumihin in the doorway.
CHAPTER II
It was nearly eight o’clock. The two young men hurried to Bakaleyev’s,to arrive before Luzhin.
“Why, who was that?” asked Razumihin, as soon as they were in thestreet.
“It was Svidrigaïlov, that landowner in whose house my sister wasinsulted when she was their governess. Through his persecuting her withhis attentions, she was turned out by his wife, Marfa Petrovna. ThisMarfa Petrovna begged Dounia’s forgiveness afterwards, and she’s justdied suddenly. It was of her we were talking this morning. I don’tknow why I’m afraid of that man. He came here at once after his wife’sfuneral. He is very strange, and is determined on doing something.... Wemust guard Dounia from him... that’s what I wanted to tell you, do youhear?”
“Guard her! What can he do to harm Avdotya Romanovna? Thank you, Rodya,for speaking to me like that.... We will, we will guard her. Where doeshe live?”
“I don’t know.”
“Why didn’t you ask? What a pity! I’ll find out, though.”
“Did you see him?” asked Raskolnikov after a pause.
“Yes, I noticed him, I noticed him well.”
“You did really see him? You saw him clearly?” Raskolnikov insisted.
“Yes, I remember him perfectly, I should know him in a thousand; I havea good memory for faces.”
They were silent again.
“Hm!... that’s all right,” muttered Raskolnikov. “Do you know, Ifancied... I keep thinking that it may have been an hallucination.”
“What do you mean? I don’t understand you.”
“Well, you all say,” Raskolnikov went on, twisting his mouth into asmile, “that I am mad. I thought just now that perhaps I really am mad,and have only seen a phantom.”
“What do you mean?”
“Why, who can tell? Perhaps I am really mad, and perhaps everything thathappened all these days may be only imagination.”
“Ach, Rodya, you have been upset again!... But what did he say, what didhe come for?”
Raskolnikov did not answer. Razumihin thought a minute.
“Now let me tell you my story,” he began, “I came to you, you wereasleep. Then we had dinner and then I went to Porfiry’s, Zametov wasstill with him. I tried to begin, but it was no use. I couldn’t speak inthe right way. They don’t seem to understand and can’t understand, butare not a bit ashamed. I drew Porfiry to the window, and began talkingto him, but it was still no use. He looked away and I looked away. Atlast I shook my fist in his ugly face, and told him as a cousin I’dbrain him. He merely looked at me, I cursed and came away. That wasall. It was very stupid. To Zametov I didn’t say a word. But, you see, Ithought I’d made a mess of it, but as I went downstairs a brilliant ideastruck me: why should we trouble? Of course if you were in any dangeror anything, but why need you care? You needn’t care a hang for them. Weshall have a laugh at them afterwards, and if I were in your place I’dmystify them more than ever. How ashamed they’ll be afterwards! Hangthem! We can thrash them afterwards, but let’s laugh at them now!”
“To be sure,” answered Raskolnikov. “But what will you say to-morrow?”he thought to himself. Strange to say, till that moment it had neveroccurred to him to wonder what Razumihin would think when he knew. As hethought it, Raskolnikov looked at him. Razumihin’s account of his visitto Porfiry had very little interest for him, so much had come and gonesince then.
In the corridor they came upon Luzhin; he had arrived punctuallyat eight, and was looking for the number, so that all three went intogether without greeting or looking at one another. The young menwalked in first, while Pyotr Petrovitch, for good manners, lingered alittle in the passage, taking off his coat. Pulcheria Alexandrovna cameforward at once to greet him in the doorway, Dounia was welcoming herbrother. Pyotr Petrovitch walked in and quite amiably, though withredoubled dignity, bowed to the ladies. He looked, however, as thoughhe were a little put out and could not yet recover himself. PulcheriaAlexandrovna, who seemed also a little embarrassed, hastened to makethem all sit down at the round table where a samovar was boiling. Douniaand Luzhin were facing one another on opposite sides of the table.Razumihin and Raskolnikov were facing Pulcheria Alexandrovna, Razumihinwas next to Luzhin and Raskolnikov was beside his sister.
A moment’s silence followed. Pyotr Petrovitch deliberately drew out acambric handkerchief reeking of scent and blew his nose with an air ofa benevolent man who felt himself slighted, and was firmly resolved toinsist on an explanation. In the passage the idea had occurred to him tokeep on his overcoat and walk away, and so give the two ladies a sharpand emphatic lesson and make them feel the gravity of the position.But he could not bring himself to do this. Besides, he could not endureuncertainty, and he wanted an explanation: if his request had been soopenly disobeyed, there was something behind it, and in that case it wasbetter to find it out beforehand; it rested with him to punish them andthere would always be time for that.
“I trust you had a favourable journey,” he inquired officially ofPulcheria Alexandrovna.
“Oh, very, Pyotr Petrovitch.”
“I am gratified to hear it. And Avdotya Romanovna is not over-fatiguedeither?”
“I am young and strong, I don’t get tired, but it was a great strain formother,” answered Dounia.
“That’s unavoidable! our national railways are of terrible length.‘Mother Russia,’ as they say, is a vast country.... In spite of all mydesire to do so, I was unable to meet you yesterday. But I trust allpassed off without inconvenience?”
“Oh, no, Pyotr Petrovitch, it was all terribly disheartening,” PulcheriaAlexandrovna hastened to declare with peculiar intonation, “and ifDmitri Prokofitch had not been sent us, I really believe by God Himself,we should have been utterly lost. Here, he is! Dmitri ProkofitchRazumihin,” she added, introducing him to Luzhin.
“I had the pleasure... yesterday,” muttered Pyotr Petrovitch with ahostile glance sidelong at Razumihin; then he scowled and was silent.
Pyotr Petrovitch belonged to that class of persons, on the surface verypolite in society, who make a great point of punctiliousness, but who,directly they are crossed in anything, are completely disconcerted, andbecome more like sacks of flour than elegant and lively men of society.Again all was silent; Raskolnikov was obstinately mute, AvdotyaRomanovna was unwilling to open the conversation too soon. Razumihin hadnothing to say, so Pulcheria Alexandrovna was anxious again.
“Marfa Petrovna is dead, have you heard?” she began having recourse toher leading item of conversation.
“To be sure, I heard so. I was immediately informed, and I have come tomake you acquainted with the fact that Arkady Ivanovitch Svidrigaïlovset off in haste for Petersburg immediately after his wife’s funeral. Soat least I have excellent authority for believing.”
“To Petersburg? here?” Dounia asked in alarm and looked at her mother.
“Yes, indeed, and doubtless not without some design, having in view therapidity of his departure, and all the circumstances preceding it.”
“Good heavens! won’t he leave Dounia in peace even here?” criedPulcheria Alexandrovna.
“I imagine that neither you nor Avdotya Romanovna have any grounds foruneasiness, unless, of course, you are yourselves desirous of gettinginto communication with him. For my part I am on my guard, and am nowdiscovering where he is lodging.”
“Oh, Pyotr Petrovitch, you would not believe what a fright you havegiven me,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna went on: “I’ve only seen him twice,but I thought him terrible, terrible! I am convinced that he was thecause of Marfa Petrovna’s death.”
“It’s impossible to be certain about that. I have precise information. Ido not dispute that he may have contributed to accelerate the course ofevents by the moral influence, so to say, of the affront; but as to thegeneral conduct and moral characteristics of that personage, I amin agreement with you. I do not know whether he is well off now, andprecisely what Marfa Petrovna left him; this will be known to me withina very short period; but no doubt here in Petersburg, if he has anypecuniary resources, he will relapse at once into his old ways. He isthe most depraved, and abjectly vicious specimen of that class of men.I have considerable reason to believe that Marfa Petrovna, who was sounfortunate as to fall in love with him and to pay his debts eight yearsago, was of service to him also in another way. Solely by her exertionsand sacrifices, a criminal charge, involving an element of fantasticand homicidal brutality for which he might well have been sentenced toSiberia, was hushed up. That’s the sort of man he is, if you care toknow.”
“Good heavens!” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. Raskolnikov listenedattentively.
“Are you speaking the truth when you say that you have good evidence ofthis?” Dounia asked sternly and emphatically.
“I only repeat what I was told in secret by Marfa Petrovna. I mustobserve that from the legal point of view the case was far from clear.There was, and I believe still is, living here a woman called Resslich,a foreigner, who lent small sums of money at interest, and did othercommissions, and with this woman Svidrigaïlov had for a long while closeand mysterious relations. She had a relation, a niece I believe, livingwith her, a deaf and dumb girl of fifteen, or perhaps not more thanfourteen. Resslich hated this girl, and grudged her every crust; sheused to beat her mercilessly. One day the girl was found hanging inthe garret. At the inquest the verdict was suicide. After the usualproceedings the matter ended, but, later on, information was given thatthe child had been... cruelly outraged by Svidrigaïlov. It is true, thiswas not clearly established, the information was given by another Germanwoman of loose character whose word could not be trusted; no statementwas actually made to the police, thanks to Marfa Petrovna’s money andexertions; it did not get beyond gossip. And yet the story is a verysignificant one. You heard, no doubt, Avdotya Romanovna, when you werewith them the story of the servant Philip who died of ill treatment hereceived six years ago, before the abolition of serfdom.”
“I heard, on the contrary, that this Philip hanged himself.”
“Quite so, but what drove him, or rather perhaps disposed him,to suicide was the systematic persecution and severity of Mr.Svidrigaïlov.”
“I don’t know that,” answered Dounia, dryly. “I only heard a queer storythat Philip was a sort of hypochondriac, a sort of domestic philosopher,the servants used to say, ‘he read himself silly,’ and that he hangedhimself partly on account of Mr. Svidrigaïlov’s mockery of him and nothis blows. When I was there he behaved well to the servants, and theywere actually fond of him, though they certainly did blame him forPhilip’s death.”
“I perceive, Avdotya Romanovna, that you seem disposed to undertake hisdefence all of a sudden,” Luzhin observed, twisting his lips intoan ambiguous smile, “there’s no doubt that he is an astute man, andinsinuating where ladies are concerned, of which Marfa Petrovna, who hasdied so strangely, is a terrible instance. My only desire has been to beof service to you and your mother with my advice, in view of the renewedefforts which may certainly be anticipated from him. For my part it’smy firm conviction, that he will end in a debtor’s prison again.Marfa Petrovna had not the slightest intention of settling anythingsubstantial on him, having regard for his children’s interests, and,if she left him anything, it would only be the merest sufficiency,something insignificant and ephemeral, which would not last a year for aman of his habits.”
“Pyotr Petrovitch, I beg you,” said Dounia, “say no more of Mr.Svidrigaïlov. It makes me miserable.”
“He has just been to see me,” said Raskolnikov, breaking his silence forthe first time.
There were exclamations from all, and they all turned to him. Even PyotrPetrovitch was roused.
“An hour and a half ago, he came in when I was asleep, waked me, andintroduced himself,” Raskolnikov continued. “He was fairly cheerfuland at ease, and quite hopes that we shall become friends. He isparticularly anxious, by the way, Dounia, for an interview with you, atwhich he asked me to assist. He has a proposition to make to you, andhe told me about it. He told me, too, that a week before her death MarfaPetrovna left you three thousand roubles in her will, Dounia, and thatyou can receive the money very shortly.”
“Thank God!” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna, crossing herself. “Pray forher soul, Dounia!”
“It’s a fact!” broke from Luzhin.
“Tell us, what more?” Dounia urged Raskolnikov.
“Then he said that he wasn’t rich and all the estate was left to hischildren who are now with an aunt, then that he was staying somewherenot far from me, but where, I don’t know, I didn’t ask....”
“But what, what does he want to propose to Dounia?” cried PulcheriaAlexandrovna in a fright. “Did he tell you?”
“Yes.”
“What was it?”
“I’ll tell you afterwards.”
Raskolnikov ceased speaking and turned his attention to his tea.
Pyotr Petrovitch looked at his watch.
“I am compelled to keep a business engagement, and so I shall not be inyour way,” he added with an air of some pique and he began getting up.
“Don’t go, Pyotr Petrovitch,” said Dounia, “you intended to spendthe evening. Besides, you wrote yourself that you wanted to have anexplanation with mother.”
“Precisely so, Avdotya Romanovna,” Pyotr Petrovitch answeredimpressively, sitting down again, but still holding his hat. “Icertainly desired an explanation with you and your honoured mother upona very important point indeed. But as your brother cannot speak openlyin my presence of some proposals of Mr. Svidrigaïlov, I, too, do notdesire and am not able to speak openly... in the presence of others...of certain matters of the greatest gravity. Moreover, my most weightyand urgent request has been disregarded....”
Assuming an aggrieved air, Luzhin relapsed into dignified silence.
“Your request that my brother should not be present at our meeting wasdisregarded solely at my insistance,” said Dounia. “You wrote that youhad been insulted by my brother; I think that this must be explained atonce, and you must be reconciled. And if Rodya really has insulted you,then he _should_ and _will_ apologise.”
Pyotr Petrovitch took a stronger line.
“There are insults, Avdotya Romanovna, which no goodwill can make usforget. There is a line in everything which it is dangerous to overstep;and when it has been overstepped, there is no return.”
“That wasn’t what I was speaking of exactly, Pyotr Petrovitch,” Douniainterrupted with some impatience. “Please understand that our wholefuture depends now on whether all this is explained and set right assoon as possible. I tell you frankly at the start that I cannot look atit in any other light, and if you have the least regard for me, all thisbusiness must be ended to-day, however hard that may be. I repeat thatif my brother is to blame he will ask your forgiveness.”
“I am surprised at your putting the question like that,” said Luzhin,getting more and more irritated. “Esteeming, and so to say, adoring you,I may at the same time, very well indeed, be able to dislike some memberof your family. Though I lay claim to the happiness of your hand, Icannot accept duties incompatible with...”
“Ah, don’t be so ready to take offence, Pyotr Petrovitch,” Douniainterrupted with feeling, “and be the sensible and generous man I havealways considered, and wish to consider, you to be. I’ve given you agreat promise, I am your betrothed. Trust me in this matter and, believeme, I shall be capable of judging impartially. My assuming the part ofjudge is as much a surprise for my brother as for you. When I insistedon his coming to our interview to-day after your letter, I toldhim nothing of what I meant to do. Understand that, if you are notreconciled, I must choose between you--it must be either you or he. Thatis how the question rests on your side and on his. I don’t want to bemistaken in my choice, and I must not be. For your sake I must break offwith my brother, for my brother’s sake I must break off with you. I canfind out for certain now whether he is a brother to me, and I want toknow it; and of you, whether I am dear to you, whether you esteem me,whether you are the husband for me.”
“Avdotya Romanovna,” Luzhin declared huffily, “your words are of toomuch consequence to me; I will say more, they are offensive in viewof the position I have the honour to occupy in relation to you. To saynothing of your strange and offensive setting me on a level with animpertinent boy, you admit the possibility of breaking your promise tome. You say ‘you or he,’ showing thereby of how little consequence Iam in your eyes... I cannot let this pass considering the relationshipand... the obligations existing between us.”
“What!” cried Dounia, flushing. “I set your interest beside all that hashitherto been most precious in my life, what has made up the _whole_ ofmy life, and here you are offended at my making too _little_ account ofyou.”
Raskolnikov smiled sarcastically, Razumihin fidgeted, but PyotrPetrovitch did not accept the reproof; on the contrary, at every word hebecame more persistent and irritable, as though he relished it.
“Love for the future partner of your life, for your husband, ought tooutweigh your love for your brother,” he pronounced sententiously, “andin any case I cannot be put on the same level.... Although I said soemphatically that I would not speak openly in your brother’s presence,nevertheless, I intend now to ask your honoured mother for a necessaryexplanation on a point of great importance closely affecting my dignity.Your son,” he turned to Pulcheria Alexandrovna, “yesterday in thepresence of Mr. Razsudkin (or... I think that’s it? excuse me I haveforgotten your surname,” he bowed politely to Razumihin) “insulted me bymisrepresenting the idea I expressed to you in a private conversation,drinking coffee, that is, that marriage with a poor girl who has hadexperience of trouble is more advantageous from the conjugal point ofview than with one who has lived in luxury, since it is more profitablefor the moral character. Your son intentionally exaggerated thesignificance of my words and made them ridiculous, accusing me ofmalicious intentions, and, as far as I could see, relied upon yourcorrespondence with him. I shall consider myself happy, PulcheriaAlexandrovna, if it is possible for you to convince me of an oppositeconclusion, and thereby considerately reassure me. Kindly let me knowin what terms precisely you repeated my words in your letter to RodionRomanovitch.”
“I don’t remember,” faltered Pulcheria Alexandrovna. “I repeated them asI understood them. I don’t know how Rodya repeated them to you, perhapshe exaggerated.”
“He could not have exaggerated them, except at your instigation.”
“Pyotr Petrovitch,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna declared with dignity, “theproof that Dounia and I did not take your words in a very bad sense isthe fact that we are here.”
“Good, mother,” said Dounia approvingly.
“Then this is my fault again,” said Luzhin, aggrieved.
“Well, Pyotr Petrovitch, you keep blaming Rodion, but you yourself havejust written what was false about him,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna added,gaining courage.
“I don’t remember writing anything false.”
“You wrote,” Raskolnikov said sharply, not turning to Luzhin, “that Igave money yesterday not to the widow of the man who was killed, as wasthe fact, but to his daughter (whom I had never seen till yesterday).You wrote this to make dissension between me and my family, and for thatobject added coarse expressions about the conduct of a girl whom youdon’t know. All that is mean slander.”
“Excuse me, sir,” said Luzhin, quivering with fury. “I enlarged uponyour qualities and conduct in my letter solely in response to yoursister’s and mother’s inquiries, how I found you, and what impressionyou made on me. As for what you’ve alluded to in my letter, be so goodas to point out one word of falsehood, show, that is, that you didn’tthrow away your money, and that there are not worthless persons in thatfamily, however unfortunate.”
“To my thinking, you, with all your virtues, are not worth the littlefinger of that unfortunate girl at whom you throw stones.”
“Would you go so far then as to let her associate with your mother andsister?”
“I have done so already, if you care to know. I made her sit down to-daywith mother and Dounia.”
“Rodya!” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. Dounia crimsoned, Razumihinknitted his brows. Luzhin smiled with lofty sarcasm.
“You may see for yourself, Avdotya Romanovna,” he said, “whether it ispossible for us to agree. I hope now that this question is at an end,once and for all. I will withdraw, that I may not hinder the pleasuresof family intimacy, and the discussion of secrets.” He got up from hischair and took his hat. “But in withdrawing, I venture to requestthat for the future I may be spared similar meetings, and, so tosay, compromises. I appeal particularly to you, honoured PulcheriaAlexandrovna, on this subject, the more as my letter was addressed toyou and to no one else.”
Pulcheria Alexandrovna was a little offended.
“You seem to think we are completely under your authority, PyotrPetrovitch. Dounia has told you the reason your desire was disregarded,she had the best intentions. And indeed you write as though you werelaying commands upon me. Are we to consider every desire of yours asa command? Let me tell you on the contrary that you ought to showparticular delicacy and consideration for us now, because we have thrownup everything, and have come here relying on you, and so we are in anycase in a sense in your hands.”
“That is not quite true, Pulcheria Alexandrovna, especially at thepresent moment, when the news has come of Marfa Petrovna’s legacy, whichseems indeed very apropos, judging from the new tone you take to me,” headded sarcastically.
“Judging from that remark, we may certainly presume that you werereckoning on our helplessness,” Dounia observed irritably.
“But now in any case I cannot reckon on it, and I particularly desirenot to hinder your discussion of the secret proposals of ArkadyIvanovitch Svidrigaïlov, which he has entrusted to your brother andwhich have, I perceive, a great and possibly a very agreeable interestfor you.”
“Good heavens!” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
Razumihin could not sit still on his chair.
“Aren’t you ashamed now, sister?” asked Raskolnikov.
“I am ashamed, Rodya,” said Dounia. “Pyotr Petrovitch, go away,” sheturned to him, white with anger.
Pyotr Petrovitch had apparently not at all expected such a conclusion.He had too much confidence in himself, in his power and in thehelplessness of his victims. He could not believe it even now. He turnedpale, and his lips quivered.
“Avdotya Romanovna, if I go out of this door now, after such adismissal, then, you may reckon on it, I will never come back. Considerwhat you are doing. My word is not to be shaken.”
“What insolence!” cried Dounia, springing up from her seat. “I don’twant you to come back again.”
“What! So that’s how it stands!” cried Luzhin, utterly unable to thelast moment to believe in the rupture and so completely thrown out ofhis reckoning now. “So that’s how it stands! But do you know, AvdotyaRomanovna, that I might protest?”
“What right have you to speak to her like that?” Pulcheria Alexandrovnaintervened hotly. “And what can you protest about? What rights have you?Am I to give my Dounia to a man like you? Go away, leave us altogether!We are to blame for having agreed to a wrong action, and I aboveall....”
“But you have bound me, Pulcheria Alexandrovna,” Luzhin stormed in afrenzy, “by your promise, and now you deny it and... besides... I havebeen led on account of that into expenses....”
This last complaint was so characteristic of Pyotr Petrovitch, thatRaskolnikov, pale with anger and with the effort of restraining it,could not help breaking into laughter. But Pulcheria Alexandrovna wasfurious.
“Expenses? What expenses? Are you speaking of our trunk? But theconductor brought it for nothing for you. Mercy on us, we have boundyou! What are you thinking about, Pyotr Petrovitch, it was you bound us,hand and foot, not we!”
“Enough, mother, no more please,” Avdotya Romanovna implored. “PyotrPetrovitch, do be kind and go!”
“I am going, but one last word,” he said, quite unable to controlhimself. “Your mamma seems to have entirely forgotten that I made up mymind to take you, so to speak, after the gossip of the town had spreadall over the district in regard to your reputation. Disregarding publicopinion for your sake and reinstating your reputation, I certainlymight very well reckon on a fitting return, and might indeed look forgratitude on your part. And my eyes have only now been opened! I seemyself that I may have acted very, very recklessly in disregarding theuniversal verdict....”
“Does the fellow want his head smashed?” cried Razumihin, jumping up.
“You are a mean and spiteful man!” cried Dounia.
“Not a word! Not a movement!” cried Raskolnikov, holding Razumihin back;then going close up to Luzhin, “Kindly leave the room!” he said quietlyand distinctly, “and not a word more or...”
Pyotr Petrovitch gazed at him for some seconds with a pale face thatworked with anger, then he turned, went out, and rarely has any mancarried away in his heart such vindictive hatred as he felt againstRaskolnikov. Him, and him alone, he blamed for everything. It isnoteworthy that as he went downstairs he still imagined that his casewas perhaps not utterly lost, and that, so far as the ladies wereconcerned, all might “very well indeed” be set right again.
CHAPTER III
The fact was that up to the last moment he had never expected such anending; he had been overbearing to the last degree, never dreaming thattwo destitute and defenceless women could escape from his control. Thisconviction was strengthened by his vanity and conceit, a conceit tothe point of fatuity. Pyotr Petrovitch, who had made his way up frominsignificance, was morbidly given to self-admiration, had the highestopinion of his intelligence and capacities, and sometimes even gloatedin solitude over his image in the glass. But what he loved and valuedabove all was the money he had amassed by his labour, and by all sortsof devices: that money made him the equal of all who had been hissuperiors.
When he had bitterly reminded Dounia that he had decided to take her inspite of evil report, Pyotr Petrovitch had spoken with perfect sincerityand had, indeed, felt genuinely indignant at such “black ingratitude.”And yet, when he made Dounia his offer, he was fully aware of thegroundlessness of all the gossip. The story had been everywherecontradicted by Marfa Petrovna, and was by then disbelieved by all thetownspeople, who were warm in Dounia’a defence. And he would not havedenied that he knew all that at the time. Yet he still thought highlyof his own resolution in lifting Dounia to his level and regarded it assomething heroic. In speaking of it to Dounia, he had let out the secretfeeling he cherished and admired, and he could not understand thatothers should fail to admire it too. He had called on Raskolnikov withthe feelings of a benefactor who is about to reap the fruits of his gooddeeds and to hear agreeable flattery. And as he went downstairs now, heconsidered himself most undeservedly injured and unrecognised.
Dounia was simply essential to him; to do without her was unthinkable.For many years he had had voluptuous dreams of marriage, but he hadgone on waiting and amassing money. He brooded with relish, in profoundsecret, over the image of a girl--virtuous, poor (she must be poor),very young, very pretty, of good birth and education, very timid, onewho had suffered much, and was completely humbled before him, one whowould all her life look on him as her saviour, worship him, admire himand only him. How many scenes, how many amorous episodes he had imaginedon this seductive and playful theme, when his work was over! And,behold, the dream of so many years was all but realised; the beauty andeducation of Avdotya Romanovna had impressed him; her helpless positionhad been a great allurement; in her he had found even more than hedreamed of. Here was a girl of pride, character, virtue, of educationand breeding superior to his own (he felt that), and this creature wouldbe slavishly grateful all her life for his heroic condescension, andwould humble herself in the dust before him, and he would have absolute,unbounded power over her!... Not long before, he had, too, after longreflection and hesitation, made an important change in his career andwas now entering on a wider circle of business. With this change hischerished dreams of rising into a higher class of society seemed likelyto be realised.... He was, in fact, determined to try his fortunein Petersburg. He knew that women could do a very great deal. Thefascination of a charming, virtuous, highly educated woman might makehis way easier, might do wonders in attracting people to him, throwingan aureole round him, and now everything was in ruins! This suddenhorrible rupture affected him like a clap of thunder; it was like ahideous joke, an absurdity. He had only been a tiny bit masterful,had not even time to speak out, had simply made a joke, been carriedaway--and it had ended so seriously. And, of course, too, he did loveDounia in his own way; he already possessed her in his dreams--and allat once! No! The next day, the very next day, it must all be set right,smoothed over, settled. Above all he must crush that conceited milksopwho was the cause of it all. With a sick feeling he could not helprecalling Razumihin too, but, he soon reassured himself on that score;as though a fellow like that could be put on a level with him! The manhe really dreaded in earnest was Svidrigaïlov.... He had, in short, agreat deal to attend to....
*****
“No, I, I am more to blame than anyone!” said Dounia, kissing andembracing her mother. “I was tempted by his money, but on my honour,brother, I had no idea he was such a base man. If I had seen through himbefore, nothing would have tempted me! Don’t blame me, brother!”
“God has delivered us! God has delivered us!” Pulcheria Alexandrovnamuttered, but half consciously, as though scarcely able to realise whathad happened.
They were all relieved, and in five minutes they were laughing. Only nowand then Dounia turned white and frowned, remembering what had passed.Pulcheria Alexandrovna was surprised to find that she, too, was glad:she had only that morning thought rupture with Luzhin a terriblemisfortune. Razumihin was delighted. He did not yet dare to express hisjoy fully, but he was in a fever of excitement as though a ton-weighthad fallen off his heart. Now he had the right to devote his life tothem, to serve them.... Anything might happen now! But he felt afraid tothink of further possibilities and dared not let his imaginationrange. But Raskolnikov sat still in the same place, almost sullen andindifferent. Though he had been the most insistent on getting rid ofLuzhin, he seemed now the least concerned at what had happened. Douniacould not help thinking that he was still angry with her, and PulcheriaAlexandrovna watched him timidly.
“What did Svidrigaïlov say to you?” said Dounia, approaching him.
“Yes, yes!” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.
Raskolnikov raised his head.
“He wants to make you a present of ten thousand roubles and he desiresto see you once in my presence.”
“See her! On no account!” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. “And how dare heoffer her money!”
Then Raskolnikov repeated (rather dryly) his conversation withSvidrigaïlov, omitting his account of the ghostly visitations of MarfaPetrovna, wishing to avoid all unnecessary talk.
“What answer did you give him?” asked Dounia.
“At first I said I would not take any message to you. Then he said thathe would do his utmost to obtain an interview with you without my help.He assured me that his passion for you was a passing infatuation, now hehas no feeling for you. He doesn’t want you to marry Luzhin.... His talkwas altogether rather muddled.”
“How do you explain him to yourself, Rodya? How did he strike you?”
“I must confess I don’t quite understand him. He offers you tenthousand, and yet says he is not well off. He says he is going away, andin ten minutes he forgets he has said it. Then he says he is going to bemarried and has already fixed on the girl.... No doubt he has a motive,and probably a bad one. But it’s odd that he should be so clumsy aboutit if he had any designs against you.... Of course, I refused thismoney on your account, once for all. Altogether, I thought him verystrange.... One might almost think he was mad. But I may be mistaken;that may only be the part he assumes. The death of Marfa Petrovna seemsto have made a great impression on him.”
“God rest her soul,” exclaimed Pulcheria Alexandrovna. “I shall always,always pray for her! Where should we be now, Dounia, without this threethousand! It’s as though it had fallen from heaven! Why, Rodya, thismorning we had only three roubles in our pocket and Dounia and I werejust planning to pawn her watch, so as to avoid borrowing from that manuntil he offered help.”
Dounia seemed strangely impressed by Svidrigaïlov’s offer. She stillstood meditating.
“He has got some terrible plan,” she said in a half whisper to herself,almost shuddering.
Raskolnikov noticed this disproportionate terror.
“I fancy I shall have to see him more than once again,” he said toDounia.
“We will watch him! I will track him out!” cried Razumihin, vigorously.“I won’t lose sight of him. Rodya has given me leave. He said to mehimself just now. ‘Take care of my sister.’ Will you give me leave, too,Avdotya Romanovna?”
Dounia smiled and held out her hand, but the look of anxiety did notleave her face. Pulcheria Alexandrovna gazed at her timidly, but thethree thousand roubles had obviously a soothing effect on her.
A quarter of an hour later, they were all engaged in a livelyconversation. Even Raskolnikov listened attentively for some time,though he did not talk. Razumihin was the speaker.
“And why, why should you go away?” he flowed on ecstatically. “And whatare you to do in a little town? The great thing is, you are all heretogether and you need one another--you do need one another, believe me.For a time, anyway.... Take me into partnership, and I assure you we’llplan a capital enterprise. Listen! I’ll explain it all in detail toyou, the whole project! It all flashed into my head this morning,before anything had happened... I tell you what; I have an uncle, I mustintroduce him to you (a most accommodating and respectable old man).This uncle has got a capital of a thousand roubles, and he lives on hispension and has no need of that money. For the last two years he hasbeen bothering me to borrow it from him and pay him six per cent.interest. I know what that means; he simply wants to help me. Last yearI had no need of it, but this year I resolved to borrow it as soon ashe arrived. Then you lend me another thousand of your three and we haveenough for a start, so we’ll go into partnership, and what are we goingto do?”
Then Razumihin began to unfold his project, and he explained at lengththat almost all our publishers and booksellers know nothing at allof what they are selling, and for that reason they are usually badpublishers, and that any decent publications pay as a rule and givea profit, sometimes a considerable one. Razumihin had, indeed, beendreaming of setting up as a publisher. For the last two years he hadbeen working in publishers’ offices, and knew three European languageswell, though he had told Raskolnikov six days before that he was“schwach” in German with an object of persuading him to take half histranslation and half the payment for it. He had told a lie then, andRaskolnikov knew he was lying.
“Why, why should we let our chance slip when we have one of the chiefmeans of success--money of our own!” cried Razumihin warmly. “Of coursethere will be a lot of work, but we will work, you, Avdotya Romanovna,I, Rodion.... You get a splendid profit on some books nowadays! Andthe great point of the business is that we shall know just what wantstranslating, and we shall be translating, publishing, learning all atonce. I can be of use because I have experience. For nearly two yearsI’ve been scuttling about among the publishers, and now I know everydetail of their business. You need not be a saint to make pots, believeme! And why, why should we let our chance slip! Why, I know--and I keptthe secret--two or three books which one might get a hundred roublessimply for thinking of translating and publishing. Indeed, and I wouldnot take five hundred for the very idea of one of them. And what do youthink? If I were to tell a publisher, I dare say he’d hesitate--they aresuch blockheads! And as for the business side, printing, paper, selling,you trust to me, I know my way about. We’ll begin in a small way and goon to a large. In any case it will get us our living and we shall getback our capital.”
Dounia’s eyes shone.
“I like what you are saying, Dmitri Prokofitch!” she said.
“I know nothing about it, of course,” put in Pulcheria Alexandrovna,“it may be a good idea, but again God knows. It’s new and untried. Ofcourse, we must remain here at least for a time.” She looked at Rodya.
“What do you think, brother?” said Dounia.
“I think he’s got a very good idea,” he answered. “Of course, it’s toosoon to dream of a publishing firm, but we certainly might bring outfive or six books and be sure of success. I know of one book myselfwhich would be sure to go well. And as for his being able to manage it,there’s no doubt about that either. He knows the business.... But we cantalk it over later....”
“Hurrah!” cried Razumihin. “Now, stay, there’s a flat here in thishouse, belonging to the same owner. It’s a special flat apart, notcommunicating with these lodgings. It’s furnished, rent moderate,three rooms. Suppose you take them to begin with. I’ll pawn your watchto-morrow and bring you the money, and everything can be arranged then.You can all three live together, and Rodya will be with you. But whereare you off to, Rodya?”
“What, Rodya, you are going already?” Pulcheria Alexandrovna asked indismay.
“At such a minute?” cried Razumihin.
Dounia looked at her brother with incredulous wonder. He held his cap inhis hand, he was preparing to leave them.
“One would think you were burying me or saying good-bye for ever,” hesaid somewhat oddly. He attempted to smile, but it did not turn out asmile. “But who knows, perhaps it is the last time we shall see eachother...” he let slip accidentally. It was what he was thinking, and itsomehow was uttered aloud.
“What is the matter with you?” cried his mother.
“Where are you going, Rodya?” asked Dounia rather strangely.
“Oh, I’m quite obliged to...” he answered vaguely, as though hesitatingwhat he would say. But there was a look of sharp determination in hiswhite face.
“I meant to say... as I was coming here... I meant to tell you, mother,and you, Dounia, that it would be better for us to part for a time. Ifeel ill, I am not at peace.... I will come afterwards, I will come ofmyself... when it’s possible. I remember you and love you.... Leave me,leave me alone. I decided this even before... I’m absolutely resolved onit. Whatever may come to me, whether I come to ruin or not, I want to bealone. Forget me altogether, it’s better. Don’t inquire about me. WhenI can, I’ll come of myself or... I’ll send for you. Perhaps it will allcome back, but now if you love me, give me up... else I shall begin tohate you, I feel it.... Good-bye!”
“Good God!” cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. Both his mother and his sisterwere terribly alarmed. Razumihin was also.
“Rodya, Rodya, be reconciled with us! Let us be as before!” cried hispoor mother.
He turned slowly to the door and slowly went out of the room. Douniaovertook him.
“Brother, what are you doing to mother?” she whispered, her eyesflashing with indignation.
He looked dully at her.
“No matter, I shall come.... I’m coming,” he muttered in an undertone,as though not fully conscious of what he was saying, and he went out ofthe room.
“Wicked, heartless egoist!” cried Dounia.
“He is insane, but not heartless. He is mad! Don’t you see it? You’reheartless after that!” Razumihin whispered in her ear, squeezingher hand tightly. “I shall be back directly,” he shouted to thehorror-stricken mother, and he ran out of the room.
Raskolnikov was waiting for him at the end of the passage.
“I knew you would run after me,” he said. “Go back to them--be withthem... be with them to-morrow and always.... I... perhaps I shallcome... if I can. Good-bye.”
And without holding out his hand he walked away.
“But where are you going? What are you doing? What’s the matter withyou? How can you go on like this?” Razumihin muttered, at his wits’ end.
Raskolnikov stopped once more.
“Once for all, never ask me about anything. I have nothing to tell you.Don’t come to see me. Maybe I’ll come here.... Leave me, but _don’tleave_ them. Do you understand me?”
It was dark in the corridor, they were standing near the lamp. For aminute they were looking at one another in silence. Razumihin rememberedthat minute all his life. Raskolnikov’s burning and intent eyesgrew more penetrating every moment, piercing into his soul, into hisconsciousness. Suddenly Razumihin started. Something strange, as itwere, passed between them.... Some idea, some hint, as it were, slipped,something awful, hideous, and suddenly understood on both sides....Razumihin turned pale.
“Do you understand now?” said Raskolnikov, his face twitching nervously.“Go back, go to them,” he said suddenly, and turning quickly, he wentout of the house.
I will not attempt to describe how Razumihin went back to the ladies,how he soothed them, how he protested that Rodya needed rest in hisillness, protested that Rodya was sure to come, that he would come everyday, that he was very, very much upset, that he must not be irritated,that he, Razumihin, would watch over him, would get him a doctor, thebest doctor, a consultation.... In fact from that evening Razumihin tookhis place with them as a son and a brother.
CHAPTER IV
Raskolnikov went straight to the house on the canal bank where Sonialived. It was an old green house of three storeys. He found theporter and obtained from him vague directions as to the whereabouts ofKapernaumov, the tailor. Having found in the corner of the courtyardthe entrance to the dark and narrow staircase, he mounted to the secondfloor and came out into a gallery that ran round the whole second storeyover the yard. While he was wandering in the darkness, uncertain whereto turn for Kapernaumov’s door, a door opened three paces from him; hemechanically took hold of it.
“Who is there?” a woman’s voice asked uneasily.
“It’s I... come to see you,” answered Raskolnikov and he walked into thetiny entry.
On a broken chair stood a candle in a battered copper candlestick.
“It’s you! Good heavens!” cried Sonia weakly, and she stood rooted tothe spot.
“Which is your room? This way?” and Raskolnikov, trying not to look ather, hastened in.
A minute later Sonia, too, came in with the candle, set down thecandlestick and, completely disconcerted, stood before him inexpressiblyagitated and apparently frightened by his unexpected visit. The colourrushed suddenly to her pale face and tears came into her eyes... Shefelt sick and ashamed and happy, too.... Raskolnikov turned away quicklyand sat on a chair by the table. He scanned the room in a rapid glance.
It was a large but exceedingly low-pitched room, the only one let by theKapernaumovs, to whose rooms a closed door led in the wall on the left.In the opposite side on the right hand wall was another door, alwayskept locked. That led to the next flat, which formed a separate lodging.Sonia’s room looked like a barn; it was a very irregular quadrangle andthis gave it a grotesque appearance. A wall with three windows lookingout on to the canal ran aslant so that one corner formed a very acuteangle, and it was difficult to see in it without very strong light.The other corner was disproportionately obtuse. There was scarcely anyfurniture in the big room: in the corner on the right was a bedstead,beside it, nearest the door, a chair. A plain, deal table covered by ablue cloth stood against the same wall, close to the door into the otherflat. Two rush-bottom chairs stood by the table. On the oppositewall near the acute angle stood a small plain wooden chest of drawerslooking, as it were, lost in a desert. That was all there was in theroom. The yellow, scratched and shabby wall-paper was black in thecorners. It must have been damp and full of fumes in the winter. Therewas every sign of poverty; even the bedstead had no curtain.
Sonia looked in silence at her visitor, who was so attentively andunceremoniously scrutinising her room, and even began at last to tremblewith terror, as though she was standing before her judge and the arbiterof her destinies.
“I am late.... It’s eleven, isn’t it?” he asked, still not lifting hiseyes.
“Yes,” muttered Sonia, “oh yes, it is,” she added, hastily, as though inthat lay her means of escape. “My landlady’s clock has just struck... Iheard it myself....”
“I’ve come to you for the last time,” Raskolnikov went on gloomily,although this was the first time. “I may perhaps not see you again...”
“Are you... going away?”
“I don’t know... to-morrow....”
“Then you are not coming to Katerina Ivanovna to-morrow?” Sonia’s voiceshook.
“I don’t know. I shall know to-morrow morning.... Never mind that: I’vecome to say one word....”
He raised his brooding eyes to her and suddenly noticed that he wassitting down while she was all the while standing before him.
“Why are you standing? Sit down,” he said in a changed voice, gentle andfriendly.
She sat down. He looked kindly and almost compassionately at her.
“How thin you are! What a hand! Quite transparent, like a dead hand.”
He took her hand. Sonia smiled faintly.
“I have always been like that,” she said.
“Even when you lived at home?”
“Yes.”
“Of course, you were,” he added abruptly and the expression of his faceand the sound of his voice changed again suddenly.
He looked round him once more.
“You rent this room from the Kapernaumovs?”
“Yes....”
“They live there, through that door?”
“Yes.... They have another room like this.”
“All in one room?”
“Yes.”
“I should be afraid in your room at night,” he observed gloomily.
“They are very good people, very kind,” answered Sonia, who still seemedbewildered, “and all the furniture, everything... everything is theirs.And they are very kind and the children, too, often come to see me.”
“They all stammer, don’t they?”
“Yes.... He stammers and he’s lame. And his wife, too.... It’s notexactly that she stammers, but she can’t speak plainly. She is a verykind woman. And he used to be a house serf. And there are sevenchildren... and it’s only the eldest one that stammers and the othersare simply ill... but they don’t stammer.... But where did you hearabout them?” she added with some surprise.
“Your father told me, then. He told me all about you.... And how youwent out at six o’clock and came back at nine and how Katerina Ivanovnaknelt down by your bed.”
Sonia was confused.
“I fancied I saw him to-day,” she whispered hesitatingly.
“Whom?”
“Father. I was walking in the street, out there at the corner, about teno’clock and he seemed to be walking in front. It looked just like him. Iwanted to go to Katerina Ivanovna....”
“You were walking in the streets?”
“Yes,” Sonia whispered abruptly, again overcome with confusion andlooking down.
“Katerina Ivanovna used to beat you, I dare say?”
“Oh no, what are you saying? No!” Sonia looked at him almost withdismay.
“You love her, then?”
“Love her? Of course!” said Sonia with plaintive emphasis, and sheclasped her hands in distress. “Ah, you don’t.... If you only knew!You see, she is quite like a child.... Her mind is quite unhinged, yousee... from sorrow. And how clever she used to be... how generous... howkind! Ah, you don’t understand, you don’t understand!”
Sonia said this as though in despair, wringing her hands in excitementand distress. Her pale cheeks flushed, there was a look of anguish inher eyes. It was clear that she was stirred to the very depths, thatshe was longing to speak, to champion, to express something. A sortof _insatiable_ compassion, if one may so express it, was reflected inevery feature of her face.
“Beat me! how can you? Good heavens, beat me! And if she did beat me,what then? What of it? You know nothing, nothing about it.... She is sounhappy... ah, how unhappy! And ill.... She is seeking righteousness,she is pure. She has such faith that there must be righteousnesseverywhere and she expects it.... And if you were to torture her, shewouldn’t do wrong. She doesn’t see that it’s impossible for people tobe righteous and she is angry at it. Like a child, like a child. She isgood!”
“And what will happen to you?”
Sonia looked at him inquiringly.
“They are left on your hands, you see. They were all on your handsbefore, though.... And your father came to you to beg for drink. Well,how will it be now?”
“I don’t know,” Sonia articulated mournfully.
“Will they stay there?”
“I don’t know.... They are in debt for the lodging, but the landlady,I hear, said to-day that she wanted to get rid of them, and KaterinaIvanovna says that she won’t stay another minute.”
“How is it she is so bold? She relies upon you?”
“Oh, no, don’t talk like that.... We are one, we live like one.” Soniawas agitated again and even angry, as though a canary or some otherlittle bird were to be angry. “And what could she do? What, what couldshe do?” she persisted, getting hot and excited. “And how she criedto-day! Her mind is unhinged, haven’t you noticed it? At one minute sheis worrying like a child that everything should be right to-morrow, thelunch and all that.... Then she is wringing her hands, spitting blood,weeping, and all at once she will begin knocking her head against thewall, in despair. Then she will be comforted again. She builds all herhopes on you; she says that you will help her now and that she willborrow a little money somewhere and go to her native town with me andset up a boarding school for the daughters of gentlemen and take me tosuperintend it, and we will begin a new splendid life. And she kissesand hugs me, comforts me, and you know she has such faith, such faith inher fancies! One can’t contradict her. And all the day long she has beenwashing, cleaning, mending. She dragged the wash tub into the room withher feeble hands and sank on the bed, gasping for breath. We went thismorning to the shops to buy shoes for Polenka and Lida for theirs arequite worn out. Only the money we’d reckoned wasn’t enough, not nearlyenough. And she picked out such dear little boots, for she has taste,you don’t know. And there in the shop she burst out crying before theshopmen because she hadn’t enough.... Ah, it was sad to see her....”
“Well, after that I can understand your living like this,” Raskolnikovsaid with a bitter smile.
“And aren’t you sorry for them? Aren’t you sorry?” Sonia flew at himagain. “Why, I know, you gave your last penny yourself, though you’dseen nothing of it, and if you’d seen everything, oh dear! And howoften, how often I’ve brought her to tears! Only last week! Yes, I! Onlya week before his death. I was cruel! And how often I’ve done it! Ah,I’ve been wretched at the thought of it all day!”
Sonia wrung her hands as she spoke at the pain of remembering it.
“You were cruel?”
“Yes, I--I. I went to see them,” she went on, weeping, “and father said,‘read me something, Sonia, my head aches, read to me, here’s a book.’ Hehad a book he had got from Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov, he livesthere, he always used to get hold of such funny books. And I said, ‘Ican’t stay,’ as I didn’t want to read, and I’d gone in chiefly to showKaterina Ivanovna some collars. Lizaveta, the pedlar, sold me somecollars and cuffs cheap, pretty, new, embroidered ones. KaterinaIvanovna liked them very much; she put them on and looked at herselfin the glass and was delighted with them. ‘Make me a present of them,Sonia,’ she said, ‘please do.’ ‘_Please do_,’ she said, she wanted themso much. And when could she wear them? They just reminded her of her oldhappy days. She looked at herself in the glass, admired herself, and shehas no clothes at all, no things of her own, hasn’t had all these years!And she never asks anyone for anything; she is proud, she’d sooner giveaway everything. And these she asked for, she liked them so much. And Iwas sorry to give them. ‘What use are they to you, Katerina Ivanovna?’ Isaid. I spoke like that to her, I ought not to have said that! She gaveme such a look. And she was so grieved, so grieved at my refusing her.And it was so sad to see.... And she was not grieved for the collars,but for my refusing, I saw that. Ah, if only I could bring it all back,change it, take back those words! Ah, if I... but it’s nothing to you!”
“Did you know Lizaveta, the pedlar?”
“Yes.... Did you know her?” Sonia asked with some surprise.
“Katerina Ivanovna is in consumption, rapid consumption; she will soondie,” said Raskolnikov after a pause, without answering her question.
“Oh, no, no, no!”
And Sonia unconsciously clutched both his hands, as though imploringthat she should not.
“But it will be better if she does die.”
“No, not better, not at all better!” Sonia unconsciously repeated indismay.
“And the children? What can you do except take them to live with you?”
“Oh, I don’t know,” cried Sonia, almost in despair, and she put herhands to her head.
It was evident that that idea had very often occurred to her before andhe had only roused it again.
“And, what, if even now, while Katerina Ivanovna is alive, you get illand are taken to the hospital, what will happen then?” he persistedpitilessly.
“How can you? That cannot be!”
And Sonia’s face worked with awful terror.
“Cannot be?” Raskolnikov went on with a harsh smile. “You are notinsured against it, are you? What will happen to them then? They willbe in the street, all of them, she will cough and beg and knock her headagainst some wall, as she did to-day, and the children will cry....Then she will fall down, be taken to the police station and to thehospital, she will die, and the children...”
“Oh, no.... God will not let it be!” broke at last from Sonia’soverburdened bosom.
She listened, looking imploringly at him, clasping her hands in dumbentreaty, as though it all depended upon him.
Raskolnikov got up and began to walk about the room. A minute passed.Sonia was standing with her hands and her head hanging in terribledejection.
“And can’t you save? Put by for a rainy day?” he asked, stoppingsuddenly before her.
“No,” whispered Sonia.
“Of course not. Have you tried?” he added almost ironically.
“Yes.”
“And it didn’t come off! Of course not! No need to ask.”
And again he paced the room. Another minute passed.
“You don’t get money every day?”
Sonia was more confused than ever and colour rushed into her face again.
“No,” she whispered with a painful effort.
“It will be the same with Polenka, no doubt,” he said suddenly.
“No, no! It can’t be, no!” Sonia cried aloud in desperation, as thoughshe had been stabbed. “God would not allow anything so awful!”
“He lets others come to it.”
“No, no! God will protect her, God!” she repeated beside herself.
“But, perhaps, there is no God at all,” Raskolnikov answered with a sortof malignance, laughed and looked at her.
Sonia’s face suddenly changed; a tremor passed over it. She looked athim with unutterable reproach, tried to say something, but could notspeak and broke into bitter, bitter sobs, hiding her face in her hands.
“You say Katerina Ivanovna’s mind is unhinged; your own mind isunhinged,” he said after a brief silence.
Five minutes passed. He still paced up and down the room in silence, notlooking at her. At last he went up to her; his eyes glittered. He puthis two hands on her shoulders and looked straight into her tearfulface. His eyes were hard, feverish and piercing, his lips weretwitching. All at once he bent down quickly and dropping to theground, kissed her foot. Sonia drew back from him as from a madman. Andcertainly he looked like a madman.
“What are you doing to me?” she muttered, turning pale, and a suddenanguish clutched at her heart.
He stood up at once.
“I did not bow down to you, I bowed down to all the suffering ofhumanity,” he said wildly and walked away to the window. “Listen,” headded, turning to her a minute later. “I said just now to an insolentman that he was not worth your little finger... and that I did my sisterhonour making her sit beside you.”
“Ach, you said that to them! And in her presence?” cried Sonia,frightened. “Sit down with me! An honour! Why, I’m... dishonourable....Ah, why did you say that?”
“It was not because of your dishonour and your sin I said that of you,but because of your great suffering. But you are a great sinner, that’strue,” he added almost solemnly, “and your worst sin is that you havedestroyed and betrayed yourself _for nothing_. Isn’t that fearful? Isn’tit fearful that you are living in this filth which you loathe so, and atthe same time you know yourself (you’ve only to open your eyes) that youare not helping anyone by it, not saving anyone from anything? Tell me,”he went on almost in a frenzy, “how this shame and degradation can existin you side by side with other, opposite, holy feelings? It would bebetter, a thousand times better and wiser to leap into the water and endit all!”
“But what would become of them?” Sonia asked faintly, gazing at him witheyes of anguish, but not seeming surprised at his suggestion.
Raskolnikov looked strangely at her. He read it all in her face; so shemust have had that thought already, perhaps many times, and earnestlyshe had thought out in her despair how to end it and so earnestly, thatnow she scarcely wondered at his suggestion. She had not even noticedthe cruelty of his words. (The significance of his reproaches and hispeculiar attitude to her shame she had, of course, not noticed either,and that, too, was clear to him.) But he saw how monstrously the thoughtof her disgraceful, shameful position was torturing her and had longtortured her. “What, what,” he thought, “could hitherto have hinderedher from putting an end to it?” Only then he realised what those poorlittle orphan children and that pitiful half-crazy Katerina Ivanovna,knocking her head against the wall in her consumption, meant for Sonia.
But, nevertheless, it was clear to him again that with her character andthe amount of education she had after all received, she could not in anycase remain so. He was still confronted by the question, how could shehave remained so long in that position without going out of her mind,since she could not bring herself to jump into the water? Of course heknew that Sonia’s position was an exceptional case, though unhappily notunique and not infrequent, indeed; but that very exceptionalness, hertinge of education, her previous life might, one would have thought,have killed her at the first step on that revolting path. What held herup--surely not depravity? All that infamy had obviously only touchedher mechanically, not one drop of real depravity had penetrated to herheart; he saw that. He saw through her as she stood before him....
“There are three ways before her,” he thought, “the canal, the madhouse,or... at last to sink into depravity which obscures the mind and turnsthe heart to stone.”
The last idea was the most revolting, but he was a sceptic, he wasyoung, abstract, and therefore cruel, and so he could not help believingthat the last end was the most likely.
“But can that be true?” he cried to himself. “Can that creature who hasstill preserved the purity of her spirit be consciously drawn at lastinto that sink of filth and iniquity? Can the process already havebegun? Can it be that she has only been able to bear it till now,because vice has begun to be less loathsome to her? No, no, that cannotbe!” he cried, as Sonia had just before. “No, what has kept her from thecanal till now is the idea of sin and they, the children.... And if shehas not gone out of her mind... but who says she has not gone out of hermind? Is she in her senses? Can one talk, can one reason as she does?How can she sit on the edge of the abyss of loathsomeness into which sheis slipping and refuse to listen when she is told of danger? Does sheexpect a miracle? No doubt she does. Doesn’t that all mean madness?”
He stayed obstinately at that thought. He liked that explanation indeedbetter than any other. He began looking more intently at her.
“So you pray to God a great deal, Sonia?” he asked her.
Sonia did not speak; he stood beside her waiting for an answer.
“What should I be without God?” she whispered rapidly, forcibly,glancing at him with suddenly flashing eyes, and squeezing his hand.
“Ah, so that is it!” he thought.
“And what does God do for you?” he asked, probing her further.
Sonia was silent a long while, as though she could not answer. Her weakchest kept heaving with emotion.
“Be silent! Don’t ask! You don’t deserve!” she cried suddenly, lookingsternly and wrathfully at him.
“That’s it, that’s it,” he repeated to himself.
“He does everything,” she whispered quickly, looking down again.
“That’s the way out! That’s the explanation,” he decided, scrutinisingher with eager curiosity, with a new, strange, almost morbid feeling.He gazed at that pale, thin, irregular, angular little face, those softblue eyes, which could flash with such fire, such stern energy, thatlittle body still shaking with indignation and anger--and it all seemedto him more and more strange, almost impossible. “She is a religiousmaniac!” he repeated to himself.
There was a book lying on the chest of drawers. He had noticed it everytime he paced up and down the room. Now he took it up and looked at it.It was the New Testament in the Russian translation. It was bound inleather, old and worn.
“Where did you get that?” he called to her across the room.
She was still standing in the same place, three steps from the table.
“It was brought me,” she answered, as it were unwillingly, not lookingat him.
“Who brought it?”
“Lizaveta, I asked her for it.”
“Lizaveta! strange!” he thought.
Everything about Sonia seemed to him stranger and more wonderful everymoment. He carried the book to the candle and began to turn over thepages.
“Where is the story of Lazarus?” he asked suddenly.
Sonia looked obstinately at the ground and would not answer. She wasstanding sideways to the table.
“Where is the raising of Lazarus? Find it for me, Sonia.”
She stole a glance at him.
“You are not looking in the right place.... It’s in the fourth gospel,”she whispered sternly, without looking at him.
“Find it and read it to me,” he said. He sat down with his elbow on thetable, leaned his head on his hand and looked away sullenly, prepared tolisten.
“In three weeks’ time they’ll welcome me in the madhouse! I shall bethere if I am not in a worse place,” he muttered to himself.
Sonia heard Raskolnikov’s request distrustfully and moved hesitatinglyto the table. She took the book however.
“Haven’t you read it?” she asked, looking up at him across the table.
Her voice became sterner and sterner.
“Long ago.... When I was at school. Read!”
“And haven’t you heard it in church?”
“I... haven’t been. Do you often go?”
“N-no,” whispered Sonia.
Raskolnikov smiled.
“I understand.... And you won’t go to your father’s funeral to-morrow?”
“Yes, I shall. I was at church last week, too... I had a requiemservice.”
“For whom?”
“For Lizaveta. She was killed with an axe.”
His nerves were more and more strained. His head began to go round.
“Were you friends with Lizaveta?”
“Yes.... She was good... she used to come... not often... shecouldn’t.... We used to read together and... talk. She will see God.”
The last phrase sounded strange in his ears. And here was something newagain: the mysterious meetings with Lizaveta and both of them--religiousmaniacs.
“I shall be a religious maniac myself soon! It’s infectious!”
“Read!” he cried irritably and insistently.
Sonia still hesitated. Her heart was throbbing. She hardly dared to readto him. He looked almost with exasperation at the “unhappy lunatic.”
“What for? You don’t believe?...” she whispered softly and as it werebreathlessly.
“Read! I want you to,” he persisted. “You used to read to Lizaveta.”
Sonia opened the book and found the place. Her hands were shaking, hervoice failed her. Twice she tried to begin and could not bring out thefirst syllable.
“Now a certain man was sick named Lazarus of Bethany...” she forcedherself at last to read, but at the third word her voice broke like anoverstrained string. There was a catch in her breath.
Raskolnikov saw in part why Sonia could not bring herself to read to himand the more he saw this, the more roughly and irritably he insisted onher doing so. He understood only too well how painful it was for herto betray and unveil all that was her _own_. He understood that thesefeelings really were her _secret treasure_, which she had kept perhapsfor years, perhaps from childhood, while she lived with an unhappyfather and a distracted stepmother crazed by grief, in the midst ofstarving children and unseemly abuse and reproaches. But at the sametime he knew now and knew for certain that, although it filled her withdread and suffering, yet she had a tormenting desire to read and to readto _him_ that he might hear it, and to read _now_ whatever might come ofit!... He read this in her eyes, he could see it in her intense emotion.She mastered herself, controlled the spasm in her throat and went onreading the eleventh chapter of St. John. She went on to the nineteenthverse:
“And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary to comfort them concerningtheir brother.
“Then Martha as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming went and metHim: but Mary sat still in the house.
“Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if Thou hadst been here, my brotherhad not died.
“But I know that even now whatsoever Thou wilt ask of God, God will giveit Thee....”
Then she stopped again with a shamefaced feeling that her voice wouldquiver and break again.
“Jesus said unto her, thy brother shall rise again.
“Martha saith unto Him, I know that he shall rise again in theresurrection, at the last day.
“Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection and the life: he thatbelieveth in Me though he were dead, yet shall he live.
“And whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die. Believestthou this?
“She saith unto Him,”
(And drawing a painful breath, Sonia read distinctly and forcibly asthough she were making a public confession of faith.)
“Yea, Lord: I believe that Thou art the Christ, the Son of God Whichshould come into the world.”
She stopped and looked up quickly at him, but controlling herself wenton reading. Raskolnikov sat without moving, his elbows on the table andhis eyes turned away. She read to the thirty-second verse.
“Then when Mary was come where Jesus was and saw Him, she fell down atHis feet, saying unto Him, Lord if Thou hadst been here, my brother hadnot died.
“When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping whichcame with her, He groaned in the spirit and was troubled,
“And said, Where have ye laid him? They said unto Him, Lord, come andsee.
“Jesus wept.
“Then said the Jews, behold how He loved him!
“And some of them said, could not this Man which opened the eyes of theblind, have caused that even this man should not have died?”
Raskolnikov turned and looked at her with emotion. Yes, he had known it!She was trembling in a real physical fever. He had expected it. She wasgetting near the story of the greatest miracle and a feeling of immensetriumph came over her. Her voice rang out like a bell; triumph and joygave it power. The lines danced before her eyes, but she knew what shewas reading by heart. At the last verse “Could not this Man which openedthe eyes of the blind...” dropping her voice she passionately reproducedthe doubt, the reproach and censure of the blind disbelieving Jews, whoin another moment would fall at His feet as though struck bythunder, sobbing and believing.... “And _he, he_--too, is blinded andunbelieving, he, too, will hear, he, too, will believe, yes, yes! Atonce, now,” was what she was dreaming, and she was quivering with happyanticipation.
“Jesus therefore again groaning in Himself cometh to the grave. It was acave, and a stone lay upon it.
“Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that wasdead, saith unto Him, Lord by this time he stinketh: for he hath beendead four days.”
She laid emphasis on the word _four_.
“Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thee that if thou wouldestbelieve, thou shouldest see the glory of God?
“Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid.And Jesus lifted up His eyes and said, Father, I thank Thee that Thouhast heard Me.
“And I knew that Thou hearest Me always; but because of the people whichstand by I said it, that they may believe that Thou hast sent Me.
“And when He thus had spoken, He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, comeforth.
“And he that was dead came forth.”
(She read loudly, cold and trembling with ecstasy, as though she wereseeing it before her eyes.)
“Bound hand and foot with graveclothes; and his face was bound aboutwith a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him and let him go.
“Then many of the Jews which came to Mary and had seen the things whichJesus did believed on Him.”
She could read no more, closed the book and got up from her chairquickly.
“That is all about the raising of Lazarus,” she whispered severely andabruptly, and turning away she stood motionless, not daring to raiseher eyes to him. She still trembled feverishly. The candle-end wasflickering out in the battered candlestick, dimly lighting up in thepoverty-stricken room the murderer and the harlot who had so strangelybeen reading together the eternal book. Five minutes or more passed.
“I came to speak of something,” Raskolnikov said aloud, frowning. He gotup and went to Sonia. She lifted her eyes to him in silence. His facewas particularly stern and there was a sort of savage determination init.
“I have abandoned my family to-day,” he said, “my mother and sister. Iam not going to see them. I’ve broken with them completely.”
“What for?” asked Sonia amazed. Her recent meeting with his mother andsister had left a great impression which she could not analyse. Sheheard his news almost with horror.
“I have only you now,” he added. “Let us go together.... I’ve come toyou, we are both accursed, let us go our way together!”
His eyes glittered “as though he were mad,” Sonia thought, in her turn.
“Go where?” she asked in alarm and she involuntarily stepped back.
“How do I know? I only know it’s the same road, I know that and nothingmore. It’s the same goal!”
She looked at him and understood nothing. She knew only that he wasterribly, infinitely unhappy.
“No one of them will understand, if you tell them, but I haveunderstood. I need you, that is why I have come to you.”
“I don’t understand,” whispered Sonia.
“You’ll understand later. Haven’t you done the same? You, too, havetransgressed... have had the strength to transgress. You have laidhands on yourself, you have destroyed a life... _your own_ (it’s all thesame!). You might have lived in spirit and understanding, but you’llend in the Hay Market.... But you won’t be able to stand it, and ifyou remain alone you’ll go out of your mind like me. You are like a madcreature already. So we must go together on the same road! Let us go!”
“What for? What’s all this for?” said Sonia, strangely and violentlyagitated by his words.
“What for? Because you can’t remain like this, that’s why! You must lookthings straight in the face at last, and not weep like a child and crythat God won’t allow it. What will happen, if you should really be takento the hospital to-morrow? She is mad and in consumption, she’ll soondie and the children? Do you mean to tell me Polenka won’t come togrief? Haven’t you seen children here at the street corners sent outby their mothers to beg? I’ve found out where those mothers live and inwhat surroundings. Children can’t remain children there! At seven thechild is vicious and a thief. Yet children, you know, are the image ofChrist: ‘theirs is the kingdom of Heaven.’ He bade us honour and lovethem, they are the humanity of the future....”
“What’s to be done, what’s to be done?” repeated Sonia, weepinghysterically and wringing her hands.
“What’s to be done? Break what must be broken, once for all, that’s all,and take the suffering on oneself. What, you don’t understand? You’llunderstand later.... Freedom and power, and above all, power! Over alltrembling creation and all the ant-heap!... That’s the goal, rememberthat! That’s my farewell message. Perhaps it’s the last time I shallspeak to you. If I don’t come to-morrow, you’ll hear of it all, and thenremember these words. And some day later on, in years to come, you’llunderstand perhaps what they meant. If I come to-morrow, I’ll tell youwho killed Lizaveta.... Good-bye.”
Sonia started with terror.
“Why, do you know who killed her?” she asked, chilled with horror,looking wildly at him.
“I know and will tell... you, only you. I have chosen you out. I’m notcoming to you to ask forgiveness, but simply to tell you. I chose youout long ago to hear this, when your father talked of you and whenLizaveta was alive, I thought of it. Good-bye, don’t shake hands.To-morrow!”
He went out. Sonia gazed at him as at a madman. But she herself was likeone insane and felt it. Her head was going round.
“Good heavens, how does he know who killed Lizaveta? What did thosewords mean? It’s awful!” But at the same time _the idea_ did not enterher head, not for a moment! “Oh, he must be terribly unhappy!... He hasabandoned his mother and sister.... What for? What has happened? Andwhat had he in his mind? What did he say to her? He had kissed her footand said... said (yes, he had said it clearly) that he could not livewithout her.... Oh, merciful heavens!”
Sonia spent the whole night feverish and delirious. She jumped up fromtime to time, wept and wrung her hands, then sank again into feverishsleep and dreamt of Polenka, Katerina Ivanovna and Lizaveta, of readingthe gospel and him... him with pale face, with burning eyes... kissingher feet, weeping.
On the other side of the door on the right, which divided Sonia’s roomfrom Madame Resslich’s flat, was a room which had long stood empty. Acard was fixed on the gate and a notice stuck in the windows over thecanal advertising it to let. Sonia had long been accustomed to theroom’s being uninhabited. But all that time Mr. Svidrigaïlov had beenstanding, listening at the door of the empty room. When Raskolnikov wentout he stood still, thought a moment, went on tiptoe to his own roomwhich adjoined the empty one, brought a chair and noiselessly carried itto the door that led to Sonia’s room. The conversation had struck himas interesting and remarkable, and he had greatly enjoyed it--so much sothat he brought a chair that he might not in the future, to-morrow, forinstance, have to endure the inconvenience of standing a whole hour, butmight listen in comfort.
CHAPTER V
When next morning at eleven o’clock punctually Raskolnikov went into thedepartment of the investigation of criminal causes and sent his name into Porfiry Petrovitch, he was surprised at being kept waiting so long:it was at least ten minutes before he was summoned. He had expectedthat they would pounce upon him. But he stood in the waiting-room, andpeople, who apparently had nothing to do with him, were continuallypassing to and fro before him. In the next room which looked like anoffice, several clerks were sitting writing and obviously they hadno notion who or what Raskolnikov might be. He looked uneasily andsuspiciously about him to see whether there was not some guard, somemysterious watch being kept on him to prevent his escape. But there wasnothing of the sort: he saw only the faces of clerks absorbed in pettydetails, then other people, no one seemed to have any concern with him.He might go where he liked for them. The conviction grew stronger in himthat if that enigmatic man of yesterday, that phantom sprung out of theearth, had seen everything, they would not have let him stand and waitlike that. And would they have waited till he elected to appear ateleven? Either the man had not yet given information, or... or simplyhe knew nothing, had seen nothing (and how could he have seen anything?)and so all that had happened to him the day before was again a phantomexaggerated by his sick and overstrained imagination. This conjecturehad begun to grow strong the day before, in the midst of all hisalarm and despair. Thinking it all over now and preparing for a freshconflict, he was suddenly aware that he was trembling--and he felt arush of indignation at the thought that he was trembling with fear atfacing that hateful Porfiry Petrovitch. What he dreaded above all wasmeeting that man again; he hated him with an intense, unmitigated hatredand was afraid his hatred might betray him. His indignation was suchthat he ceased trembling at once; he made ready to go in with a cold andarrogant bearing and vowed to himself to keep as silent as possible,to watch and listen and for once at least to control his overstrainednerves. At that moment he was summoned to Porfiry Petrovitch.
He found Porfiry Petrovitch alone in his study. His study was a roomneither large nor small, furnished with a large writing-table, thatstood before a sofa, upholstered in checked material, a bureau, abookcase in the corner and several chairs--all government furniture,of polished yellow wood. In the further wall there was a closed door,beyond it there were no doubt other rooms. On Raskolnikov’s entrancePorfiry Petrovitch had at once closed the door by which he had come inand they remained alone. He met his visitor with an apparently genialand good-tempered air, and it was only after a few minutes thatRaskolnikov saw signs of a certain awkwardness in him, as though he hadbeen thrown out of his reckoning or caught in something very secret.
“Ah, my dear fellow! Here you are... in our domain”... began Porfiry,holding out both hands to him. “Come, sit down, old man... or perhapsyou don’t like to be called ‘my dear fellow’ and ‘old man!’--_toutcourt_? Please don’t think it too familiar.... Here, on the sofa.”
Raskolnikov sat down, keeping his eyes fixed on him. “In our domain,”the apologies for familiarity, the French phrase _tout court_, were allcharacteristic signs.
“He held out both hands to me, but he did not give me one--he drew itback in time,” struck him suspiciously. Both were watching each other,but when their eyes met, quick as lightning they looked away.
“I brought you this paper... about the watch. Here it is. Is it allright or shall I copy it again?”
“What? A paper? Yes, yes, don’t be uneasy, it’s all right,” PorfiryPetrovitch said as though in haste, and after he had said it he took thepaper and looked at it. “Yes, it’s all right. Nothing more is needed,”he declared with the same rapidity and he laid the paper on the table.
A minute later when he was talking of something else he took it from thetable and put it on his bureau.
“I believe you said yesterday you would like to question me...formally... about my acquaintance with the murdered woman?” Raskolnikovwas beginning again. “Why did I put in ‘I believe’” passed throughhis mind in a flash. “Why am I so uneasy at having put in that ‘_Ibelieve_’?” came in a second flash. And he suddenly felt that hisuneasiness at the mere contact with Porfiry, at the first words, at thefirst looks, had grown in an instant to monstrous proportions, and thatthis was fearfully dangerous. His nerves were quivering, his emotion wasincreasing. “It’s bad, it’s bad! I shall say too much again.”
“Yes, yes, yes! There’s no hurry, there’s no hurry,” muttered PorfiryPetrovitch, moving to and fro about the table without any apparent aim,as it were making dashes towards the window, the bureau and the table,at one moment avoiding Raskolnikov’s suspicious glance, then againstanding still and looking him straight in the face.
His fat round little figure looked very strange, like a ball rollingfrom one side to the other and rebounding back.
“We’ve plenty of time. Do you smoke? have you your own? Here, acigarette!” he went on, offering his visitor a cigarette. “You know I amreceiving you here, but my own quarters are through there, you know, mygovernment quarters. But I am living outside for the time, I had tohave some repairs done here. It’s almost finished now.... Governmentquarters, you know, are a capital thing. Eh, what do you think?”
“Yes, a capital thing,” answered Raskolnikov, looking at him almostironically.
“A capital thing, a capital thing,” repeated Porfiry Petrovitch, asthough he had just thought of something quite different. “Yes, a capitalthing,” he almost shouted at last, suddenly staring at Raskolnikov andstopping short two steps from him.
This stupid repetition was too incongruous in its ineptitude with theserious, brooding and enigmatic glance he turned upon his visitor.
But this stirred Raskolnikov’s spleen more than ever and he could notresist an ironical and rather incautious challenge.
“Tell me, please,” he asked suddenly, looking almost insolently at himand taking a kind of pleasure in his own insolence. “I believe it’s asort of legal rule, a sort of legal tradition--for all investigatinglawyers--to begin their attack from afar, with a trivial, or at leastan irrelevant subject, so as to encourage, or rather, to divert the manthey are cross-examining, to disarm his caution and then all at once togive him an unexpected knock-down blow with some fatal question. Isn’tthat so? It’s a sacred tradition, mentioned, I fancy, in all the manualsof the art?”
“Yes, yes.... Why, do you imagine that was why I spoke about governmentquarters... eh?”
And as he said this Porfiry Petrovitch screwed up his eyes and winked;a good-humoured, crafty look passed over his face. The wrinkles on hisforehead were smoothed out, his eyes contracted, his features broadenedand he suddenly went off into a nervous prolonged laugh, shaking allover and looking Raskolnikov straight in the face. The latter forcedhimself to laugh, too, but when Porfiry, seeing that he was laughing,broke into such a guffaw that he turned almost crimson, Raskolnikov’srepulsion overcame all precaution; he left off laughing, scowled andstared with hatred at Porfiry, keeping his eyes fixed on him while hisintentionally prolonged laughter lasted. There was lack of precaution onboth sides, however, for Porfiry Petrovitch seemed to be laughing inhis visitor’s face and to be very little disturbed at the annoyance withwhich the visitor received it. The latter fact was very significantin Raskolnikov’s eyes: he saw that Porfiry Petrovitch had not beenembarrassed just before either, but that he, Raskolnikov, had perhapsfallen into a trap; that there must be something, some motive hereunknown to him; that, perhaps, everything was in readiness and inanother moment would break upon him...
He went straight to the point at once, rose from his seat and took hiscap.
“Porfiry Petrovitch,” he began resolutely, though with considerableirritation, “yesterday you expressed a desire that I should come to youfor some inquiries” (he laid special stress on the word “inquiries”). “Ihave come and if you have anything to ask me, ask it, and if not, allowme to withdraw. I have no time to spare.... I have to be at the funeralof that man who was run over, of whom you... know also,” he added,feeling angry at once at having made this addition and more irritated athis anger. “I am sick of it all, do you hear? and have long been. It’spartly what made me ill. In short,” he shouted, feeling that the phraseabout his illness was still more out of place, “in short, kindly examineme or let me go, at once. And if you must examine me, do so in theproper form! I will not allow you to do so otherwise, and so meanwhile,good-bye, as we have evidently nothing to keep us now.”
“Good heavens! What do you mean? What shall I question you about?”cackled Porfiry Petrovitch with a change of tone, instantly leaving offlaughing. “Please don’t disturb yourself,” he began fidgeting from placeto place and fussily making Raskolnikov sit down. “There’s no hurry,there’s no hurry, it’s all nonsense. Oh, no, I’m very glad you’ve cometo see me at last... I look upon you simply as a visitor. And as formy confounded laughter, please excuse it, Rodion Romanovitch. RodionRomanovitch? That is your name?... It’s my nerves, you tickled meso with your witty observation; I assure you, sometimes I shake withlaughter like an india-rubber ball for half an hour at a time.... I’moften afraid of an attack of paralysis. Do sit down. Please do, or Ishall think you are angry...”
Raskolnikov did not speak; he listened, watching him, still frowningangrily. He did sit down, but still held his cap.
“I must tell you one thing about myself, my dear Rodion Romanovitch,”Porfiry Petrovitch continued, moving about the room and again avoidinghis visitor’s eyes. “You see, I’m a bachelor, a man of no consequenceand not used to society; besides, I have nothing before me, I’m set, I’mrunning to seed and... and have you noticed, Rodion Romanovitch, that inour Petersburg circles, if two clever men meet who are not intimate, butrespect each other, like you and me, it takes them half an hour beforethey can find a subject for conversation--they are dumb, they sitopposite each other and feel awkward. Everyone has subjects ofconversation, ladies for instance... people in high society always havetheir subjects of conversation, _c’est de rigueur_, but people of themiddle sort like us, thinking people that is, are always tongue-tiedand awkward. What is the reason of it? Whether it is the lack of publicinterest, or whether it is we are so honest we don’t want to deceive oneanother, I don’t know. What do you think? Do put down your cap, itlooks as if you were just going, it makes me uncomfortable... I am sodelighted...”
Raskolnikov put down his cap and continued listening in silence witha serious frowning face to the vague and empty chatter of PorfiryPetrovitch. “Does he really want to distract my attention with his sillybabble?”
“I can’t offer you coffee here; but why not spend five minutes with afriend?” Porfiry pattered on, “and you know all these officialduties... please don’t mind my running up and down, excuse it, my dearfellow, I am very much afraid of offending you, but exercise isabsolutely indispensable for me. I’m always sitting and so glad to bemoving about for five minutes... I suffer from my sedentary life... Ialways intend to join a gymnasium; they say that officials of all ranks,even Privy Councillors, may be seen skipping gaily there; there you haveit, modern science... yes, yes.... But as for my duties here, inquiriesand all such formalities... you mentioned inquiries yourself just now...I assure you these interrogations are sometimes more embarrassing forthe interrogator than for the interrogated.... You made the observationyourself just now very aptly and wittily.” (Raskolnikov had made noobservation of the kind.) “One gets into a muddle! A regular muddle! Onekeeps harping on the same note, like a drum! There is to be a reform andwe shall be called by a different name, at least, he-he-he! And as forour legal tradition, as you so wittily called it, I thoroughly agreewith you. Every prisoner on trial, even the rudest peasant, knows thatthey begin by disarming him with irrelevant questions (as you so happilyput it) and then deal him a knock-down blow, he-he-he!--your felicitouscomparison, he-he! So you really imagined that I meant by ‘governmentquarters’... he-he! You are an ironical person. Come. I won’t go on! Ah,by the way, yes! One word leads to another. You spoke of formality justnow, apropos of the inquiry, you know. But what’s the use of formality?In many cases it’s nonsense. Sometimes one has a friendly chat and getsa good deal more out of it. One can always fall back on formality, allowme to assure you. And after all, what does it amount to? An examininglawyer cannot be bounded by formality at every step. The work ofinvestigation is, so to speak, a free art in its own way, he-he-he!”
Porfiry Petrovitch took breath a moment. He had simply babbled onuttering empty phrases, letting slip a few enigmatic words and againreverting to incoherence. He was almost running about the room, movinghis fat little legs quicker and quicker, looking at the ground, with hisright hand behind his back, while with his left making gesticulationsthat were extraordinarily incongruous with his words. Raskolnikovsuddenly noticed that as he ran about the room he seemed twice to stopfor a moment near the door, as though he were listening.
“Is he expecting anything?”
“You are certainly quite right about it,” Porfiry began gaily, lookingwith extraordinary simplicity at Raskolnikov (which startled him andinstantly put him on his guard); “certainly quite right in laughing sowittily at our legal forms, he-he! Some of these elaborate psychologicalmethods are exceedingly ridiculous and perhaps useless, if one adherestoo closely to the forms. Yes... I am talking of forms again. Well, ifI recognise, or more strictly speaking, if I suspect someone or other tobe a criminal in any case entrusted to me... you’re reading for the law,of course, Rodion Romanovitch?”
“Yes, I was...”
“Well, then it is a precedent for you for the future--though don’tsuppose I should venture to instruct you after the articles you publishabout crime! No, I simply make bold to state it by way of fact, if Itook this man or that for a criminal, why, I ask, should I worry himprematurely, even though I had evidence against him? In one case I maybe bound, for instance, to arrest a man at once, but another may be inquite a different position, you know, so why shouldn’t I let him walkabout the town a bit? he-he-he! But I see you don’t quite understand, soI’ll give you a clearer example. If I put him in prison too soon, Imay very likely give him, so to speak, moral support, he-he! You’relaughing?”
Raskolnikov had no idea of laughing. He was sitting with compressedlips, his feverish eyes fixed on Porfiry Petrovitch’s.
“Yet that is the case, with some types especially, for men are sodifferent. You say ‘evidence’. Well, there may be evidence. Butevidence, you know, can generally be taken two ways. I am an examininglawyer and a weak man, I confess it. I should like to make a proof, soto say, mathematically clear. I should like to make a chain of evidencesuch as twice two are four, it ought to be a direct, irrefutable proof!And if I shut him up too soon--even though I might be convinced _he_was the man, I should very likely be depriving myself of the means ofgetting further evidence against him. And how? By giving him, so tospeak, a definite position, I shall put him out of suspense and set hismind at rest, so that he will retreat into his shell. They say that atSevastopol, soon after Alma, the clever people were in a terrible frightthat the enemy would attack openly and take Sevastopol at once. But whenthey saw that the enemy preferred a regular siege, they were delighted,I am told and reassured, for the thing would drag on for two months atleast. You’re laughing, you don’t believe me again? Of course, you’reright, too. You’re right, you’re right. These are special cases, Iadmit. But you must observe this, my dear Rodion Romanovitch, thegeneral case, the case for which all legal forms and rules are intended,for which they are calculated and laid down in books, does not exist atall, for the reason that every case, every crime, for instance, so soonas it actually occurs, at once becomes a thoroughly special case andsometimes a case unlike any that’s gone before. Very comic cases of thatsort sometimes occur. If I leave one man quite alone, if I don’t touchhim and don’t worry him, but let him know or at least suspect everymoment that I know all about it and am watching him day and night, andif he is in continual suspicion and terror, he’ll be bound to lose hishead. He’ll come of himself, or maybe do something which will make it asplain as twice two are four--it’s delightful. It may be so with a simplepeasant, but with one of our sort, an intelligent man cultivated on acertain side, it’s a dead certainty. For, my dear fellow, it’s a veryimportant matter to know on what side a man is cultivated. And thenthere are nerves, there are nerves, you have overlooked them! Why, theyare all sick, nervous and irritable!... And then how they all sufferfrom spleen! That I assure you is a regular gold-mine for us. And it’sno anxiety to me, his running about the town free! Let him, let him walkabout for a bit! I know well enough that I’ve caught him and that hewon’t escape me. Where could he escape to, he-he? Abroad, perhaps? APole will escape abroad, but not here, especially as I am watchingand have taken measures. Will he escape into the depths of the countryperhaps? But you know, peasants live there, real rude Russian peasants.A modern cultivated man would prefer prison to living with suchstrangers as our peasants. He-he! But that’s all nonsense, and onthe surface. It’s not merely that he has nowhere to run to, he is_psychologically_ unable to escape me, he-he! What an expression!Through a law of nature he can’t escape me if he had anywhere to go.Have you seen a butterfly round a candle? That’s how he will keepcircling and circling round me. Freedom will lose its attractions. He’llbegin to brood, he’ll weave a tangle round himself, he’ll worry himselfto death! What’s more he will provide me with a mathematical proof--if Ionly give him long enough interval.... And he’ll keep circling roundme, getting nearer and nearer and then--flop! He’ll fly straight into mymouth and I’ll swallow him, and that will be very amusing, he-he-he! Youdon’t believe me?”
Raskolnikov made no reply; he sat pale and motionless, still gazing withthe same intensity into Porfiry’s face.
“It’s a lesson,” he thought, turning cold. “This is beyond the catplaying with a mouse, like yesterday. He can’t be showing off his powerwith no motive... prompting me; he is far too clever for that... he musthave another object. What is it? It’s all nonsense, my friend, you arepretending, to scare me! You’ve no proofs and the man I saw had noreal existence. You simply want to make me lose my head, to work me upbeforehand and so to crush me. But you are wrong, you won’t do it! Butwhy give me such a hint? Is he reckoning on my shattered nerves? No, myfriend, you are wrong, you won’t do it even though you have some trapfor me... let us see what you have in store for me.”
And he braced himself to face a terrible and unknown ordeal. At timeshe longed to fall on Porfiry and strangle him. This anger was what hedreaded from the beginning. He felt that his parched lips were fleckedwith foam, his heart was throbbing. But he was still determined not tospeak till the right moment. He realised that this was the bestpolicy in his position, because instead of saying too much he would beirritating his enemy by his silence and provoking him into speaking toofreely. Anyhow, this was what he hoped for.
“No, I see you don’t believe me, you think I am playing a harmless jokeon you,” Porfiry began again, getting more and more lively, chucklingat every instant and again pacing round the room. “And to be sure you’reright: God has given me a figure that can awaken none but comic ideas inother people; a buffoon; but let me tell you, and I repeat it, excusean old man, my dear Rodion Romanovitch, you are a man still young, so tosay, in your first youth and so you put intellect above everything, likeall young people. Playful wit and abstract arguments fascinate you andthat’s for all the world like the old Austrian _Hof-kriegsrath_, asfar as I can judge of military matters, that is: on paper they’d beatenNapoleon and taken him prisoner, and there in their study they worked itall out in the cleverest fashion, but look you, General Mack surrenderedwith all his army, he-he-he! I see, I see, Rodion Romanovitch, you arelaughing at a civilian like me, taking examples out of military history!But I can’t help it, it’s my weakness. I am fond of military science.And I’m ever so fond of reading all military histories. I’ve certainlymissed my proper career. I ought to have been in the army, upon myword I ought. I shouldn’t have been a Napoleon, but I might have been amajor, he-he! Well, I’ll tell you the whole truth, my dear fellow, aboutthis _special case_, I mean: actual fact and a man’s temperament, mydear sir, are weighty matters and it’s astonishing how they sometimesdeceive the sharpest calculation! I--listen to an old man--am speakingseriously, Rodion Romanovitch” (as he said this Porfiry Petrovitch, whowas scarcely five-and-thirty, actually seemed to have grown old; evenhis voice changed and he seemed to shrink together) “Moreover, I’ma candid man... am I a candid man or not? What do you say? I fancy Ireally am: I tell you these things for nothing and don’t even expect areward for it, he-he! Well, to proceed, wit in my opinion is a splendidthing, it is, so to say, an adornment of nature and a consolation oflife, and what tricks it can play! So that it sometimes is hard for apoor examining lawyer to know where he is, especially when he’s liableto be carried away by his own fancy, too, for you know he is a man afterall! But the poor fellow is saved by the criminal’s temperament, worseluck for him! But young people carried away by their own wit don’t thinkof that ‘when they overstep all obstacles,’ as you wittily and cleverlyexpressed it yesterday. He will lie--that is, the man who is a _specialcase_, the incognito, and he will lie well, in the cleverest fashion;you might think he would triumph and enjoy the fruits of his wit, but atthe most interesting, the most flagrant moment he will faint. Of coursethere may be illness and a stuffy room as well, but anyway! Anyway he’sgiven us the idea! He lied incomparably, but he didn’t reckon on histemperament. That’s what betrays him! Another time he will be carriedaway by his playful wit into making fun of the man who suspects him, hewill turn pale as it were on purpose to mislead, but his paleness willbe _too natural_, too much like the real thing, again he has given usan idea! Though his questioner may be deceived at first, he will thinkdifferently next day if he is not a fool, and, of course, it is likethat at every step! He puts himself forward where he is not wanted,speaks continually when he ought to keep silent, brings in all sorts ofallegorical allusions, he-he! Comes and asks why didn’t you take me longago? he-he-he! And that can happen, you know, with the cleverest man,the psychologist, the literary man. The temperament reflects everythinglike a mirror! Gaze into it and admire what you see! But why are you sopale, Rodion Romanovitch? Is the room stuffy? Shall I open the window?”
“Oh, don’t trouble, please,” cried Raskolnikov and he suddenly brokeinto a laugh. “Please don’t trouble.”
Porfiry stood facing him, paused a moment and suddenly he too laughed.Raskolnikov got up from the sofa, abruptly checking his hystericallaughter.
“Porfiry Petrovitch,” he began, speaking loudly and distinctly, thoughhis legs trembled and he could scarcely stand. “I see clearly at lastthat you actually suspect me of murdering that old woman and her sisterLizaveta. Let me tell you for my part that I am sick of this. If youfind that you have a right to prosecute me legally, to arrest me, thenprosecute me, arrest me. But I will not let myself be jeered at to myface and worried...”
His lips trembled, his eyes glowed with fury and he could not restrainhis voice.
“I won’t allow it!” he shouted, bringing his fist down on the table. “Doyou hear that, Porfiry Petrovitch? I won’t allow it.”
“Good heavens! What does it mean?” cried Porfiry Petrovitch, apparentlyquite frightened. “Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow, what is thematter with you?”
“I won’t allow it,” Raskolnikov shouted again.
“Hush, my dear man! They’ll hear and come in. Just think, what could wesay to them?” Porfiry Petrovitch whispered in horror, bringing his faceclose to Raskolnikov’s.
“I won’t allow it, I won’t allow it,” Raskolnikov repeated mechanically,but he too spoke in a sudden whisper.
Porfiry turned quickly and ran to open the window.
“Some fresh air! And you must have some water, my dear fellow. You’reill!” and he was running to the door to call for some when he found adecanter of water in the corner. “Come, drink a little,” he whispered,rushing up to him with the decanter. “It will be sure to do you good.”
Porfiry Petrovitch’s alarm and sympathy were so natural that Raskolnikovwas silent and began looking at him with wild curiosity. He did not takethe water, however.
“Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow, you’ll drive yourself out of yourmind, I assure you, ach, ach! Have some water, do drink a little.”
He forced him to take the glass. Raskolnikov raised it mechanically tohis lips, but set it on the table again with disgust.
“Yes, you’ve had a little attack! You’ll bring back your illness again,my dear fellow,” Porfiry Petrovitch cackled with friendly sympathy,though he still looked rather disconcerted. “Good heavens, you musttake more care of yourself! Dmitri Prokofitch was here, came to see meyesterday--I know, I know, I’ve a nasty, ironical temper, but what theymade of it!... Good heavens, he came yesterday after you’d been. Wedined and he talked and talked away, and I could only throw up my handsin despair! Did he come from you? But do sit down, for mercy’s sake, sitdown!”
“No, not from me, but I knew he went to you and why he went,”Raskolnikov answered sharply.
“You knew?”
“I knew. What of it?”
“Why this, Rodion Romanovitch, that I know more than that about you;I know about everything. I know how you went _to take a flat_ at nightwhen it was dark and how you rang the bell and asked about the blood, sothat the workmen and the porter did not know what to make of it. Yes, Iunderstand your state of mind at that time... but you’ll drive yourselfmad like that, upon my word! You’ll lose your head! You’re full ofgenerous indignation at the wrongs you’ve received, first from destiny,and then from the police officers, and so you rush from one thing toanother to force them to speak out and make an end of it all, becauseyou are sick of all this suspicion and foolishness. That’s so, isn’tit? I have guessed how you feel, haven’t I? Only in that way you’lllose your head and Razumihin’s, too; he’s too _good_ a man for sucha position, you must know that. You are ill and he is good and yourillness is infectious for him... I’ll tell you about it when you aremore yourself.... But do sit down, for goodness’ sake. Please rest, youlook shocking, do sit down.”
Raskolnikov sat down; he no longer shivered, he was hot all over. Inamazement he listened with strained attention to Porfiry Petrovitch whostill seemed frightened as he looked after him with friendly solicitude.But he did not believe a word he said, though he felt a strangeinclination to believe. Porfiry’s unexpected words about the flat hadutterly overwhelmed him. “How can it be, he knows about the flat then,”he thought suddenly, “and he tells it me himself!”
“Yes, in our legal practice there was a case almost exactly similar, acase of morbid psychology,” Porfiry went on quickly. “A man confessed tomurder and how he kept it up! It was a regular hallucination; he broughtforward facts, he imposed upon everyone and why? He had been partly, butonly partly, unintentionally the cause of a murder and when he knew thathe had given the murderers the opportunity, he sank into dejection, itgot on his mind and turned his brain, he began imagining things and hepersuaded himself that he was the murderer. But at last the High Courtof Appeal went into it and the poor fellow was acquitted and put underproper care. Thanks to the Court of Appeal! Tut-tut-tut! Why, my dearfellow, you may drive yourself into delirium if you have the impulseto work upon your nerves, to go ringing bells at night and asking aboutblood! I’ve studied all this morbid psychology in my practice. A manis sometimes tempted to jump out of a window or from a belfry. Just thesame with bell-ringing.... It’s all illness, Rodion Romanovitch! Youhave begun to neglect your illness. You should consult an experienceddoctor, what’s the good of that fat fellow? You are lightheaded! Youwere delirious when you did all this!”
For a moment Raskolnikov felt everything going round.
“Is it possible, is it possible,” flashed through his mind, “that he isstill lying? He can’t be, he can’t be.” He rejected that idea, feelingto what a degree of fury it might drive him, feeling that that furymight drive him mad.
“I was not delirious. I knew what I was doing,” he cried, strainingevery faculty to penetrate Porfiry’s game, “I was quite myself, do youhear?”
“Yes, I hear and understand. You said yesterday you were not delirious,you were particularly emphatic about it! I understand all you can tellme! A-ach!... Listen, Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow. If you wereactually a criminal, or were somehow mixed up in this damnable business,would you insist that you were not delirious but in full possessionof your faculties? And so emphatically and persistently? Would it bepossible? Quite impossible, to my thinking. If you had anything onyour conscience, you certainly ought to insist that you were delirious.That’s so, isn’t it?”
There was a note of slyness in this inquiry. Raskolnikov drew back onthe sofa as Porfiry bent over him and stared in silent perplexity athim.
“Another thing about Razumihin--you certainly ought to have said that hecame of his own accord, to have concealed your part in it! But you don’tconceal it! You lay stress on his coming at your instigation.”
Raskolnikov had not done so. A chill went down his back.
“You keep telling lies,” he said slowly and weakly, twisting his lipsinto a sickly smile, “you are trying again to show that you know allmy game, that you know all I shall say beforehand,” he said, conscioushimself that he was not weighing his words as he ought. “You want tofrighten me... or you are simply laughing at me...”
He still stared at him as he said this and again there was a light ofintense hatred in his eyes.
“You keep lying,” he said. “You know perfectly well that the bestpolicy for the criminal is to tell the truth as nearly as possible... toconceal as little as possible. I don’t believe you!”
“What a wily person you are!” Porfiry tittered, “there’s no catchingyou; you’ve a perfect monomania. So you don’t believe me? But still youdo believe me, you believe a quarter; I’ll soon make you believe thewhole, because I have a sincere liking for you and genuinely wish yougood.”
Raskolnikov’s lips trembled.
“Yes, I do,” went on Porfiry, touching Raskolnikov’s arm genially, “youmust take care of your illness. Besides, your mother and sister are herenow; you must think of them. You must soothe and comfort them and you donothing but frighten them...”
“What has that to do with you? How do you know it? What concern is it ofyours? You are keeping watch on me and want to let me know it?”
“Good heavens! Why, I learnt it all from you yourself! You don’tnotice that in your excitement you tell me and others everything. FromRazumihin, too, I learnt a number of interesting details yesterday. No,you interrupted me, but I must tell you that, for all your wit, yoursuspiciousness makes you lose the common-sense view of things. To returnto bell-ringing, for instance. I, an examining lawyer, have betrayed aprecious thing like that, a real fact (for it is a fact worth having),and you see nothing in it! Why, if I had the slightest suspicion of you,should I have acted like that? No, I should first have disarmed yoursuspicions and not let you see I knew of that fact, should have divertedyour attention and suddenly have dealt you a knock-down blow (yourexpression) saying: ‘And what were you doing, sir, pray, at ten ornearly eleven at the murdered woman’s flat and why did you ring the belland why did you ask about blood? And why did you invite the portersto go with you to the police station, to the lieutenant?’ That’s howI ought to have acted if I had a grain of suspicion of you. I ought tohave taken your evidence in due form, searched your lodging and perhapshave arrested you, too... so I have no suspicion of you, since I havenot done that! But you can’t look at it normally and you see nothing, Isay again.”
Raskolnikov started so that Porfiry Petrovitch could not fail toperceive it.
“You are lying all the while,” he cried, “I don’t know your object,but you are lying. You did not speak like that just now and I cannot bemistaken!”
“I am lying?” Porfiry repeated, apparently incensed, but preservinga good-humoured and ironical face, as though he were not in the leastconcerned at Raskolnikov’s opinion of him. “I am lying... but how didI treat you just now, I, the examining lawyer? Prompting you and givingyou every means for your defence; illness, I said, delirium, injury,melancholy and the police officers and all the rest of it? Ah! He-he-he!Though, indeed, all those psychological means of defence are not veryreliable and cut both ways: illness, delirium, I don’t remember--that’sall right, but why, my good sir, in your illness and in your deliriumwere you haunted by just those delusions and not by any others? Theremay have been others, eh? He-he-he!”
Raskolnikov looked haughtily and contemptuously at him.
“Briefly,” he said loudly and imperiously, rising to his feet and in sodoing pushing Porfiry back a little, “briefly, I want to know, do youacknowledge me perfectly free from suspicion or not? Tell me, PorfiryPetrovitch, tell me once for all and make haste!”
“What a business I’m having with you!” cried Porfiry with a perfectlygood-humoured, sly and composed face. “And why do you want to know, whydo you want to know so much, since they haven’t begun to worry you? Why,you are like a child asking for matches! And why are you so uneasy? Whydo you force yourself upon us, eh? He-he-he!”
“I repeat,” Raskolnikov cried furiously, “that I can’t put up with it!”
“With what? Uncertainty?” interrupted Porfiry.
“Don’t jeer at me! I won’t have it! I tell you I won’t have it. I can’tand I won’t, do you hear, do you hear?” he shouted, bringing his fistdown on the table again.
“Hush! Hush! They’ll overhear! I warn you seriously, take care ofyourself. I am not joking,” Porfiry whispered, but this time there wasnot the look of old womanish good nature and alarm in his face. Nowhe was peremptory, stern, frowning and for once laying aside allmystification.
But this was only for an instant. Raskolnikov, bewildered, suddenly fellinto actual frenzy, but, strange to say, he again obeyed the command tospeak quietly, though he was in a perfect paroxysm of fury.
“I will not allow myself to be tortured,” he whispered, instantlyrecognising with hatred that he could not help obeying the command anddriven to even greater fury by the thought. “Arrest me, search me, butkindly act in due form and don’t play with me! Don’t dare!”
“Don’t worry about the form,” Porfiry interrupted with the same slysmile, as it were, gloating with enjoyment over Raskolnikov. “I invitedyou to see me quite in a friendly way.”
“I don’t want your friendship and I spit on it! Do you hear? And, here,I take my cap and go. What will you say now if you mean to arrest me?”
He took up his cap and went to the door.
“And won’t you see my little surprise?” chuckled Porfiry, again takinghim by the arm and stopping him at the door.
He seemed to become more playful and good-humoured which maddenedRaskolnikov.
“What surprise?” he asked, standing still and looking at Porfiry inalarm.
“My little surprise, it’s sitting there behind the door, he-he-he!”(He pointed to the locked door.) “I locked him in that he should notescape.”
“What is it? Where? What?...”
Raskolnikov walked to the door and would have opened it, but it waslocked.
“It’s locked, here is the key!”
And he brought a key out of his pocket.
“You are lying,” roared Raskolnikov without restraint, “you lie, youdamned punchinello!” and he rushed at Porfiry who retreated to the otherdoor, not at all alarmed.
“I understand it all! You are lying and mocking so that I may betraymyself to you...”
“Why, you could not betray yourself any further, my dear RodionRomanovitch. You are in a passion. Don’t shout, I shall call theclerks.”
“You are lying! Call the clerks! You knew I was ill and tried to workme into a frenzy to make me betray myself, that was your object! Produceyour facts! I understand it all. You’ve no evidence, you have onlywretched rubbishly suspicions like Zametov’s! You knew my character, youwanted to drive me to fury and then to knock me down with priests anddeputies.... Are you waiting for them? eh! What are you waiting for?Where are they? Produce them?”
“Why deputies, my good man? What things people will imagine! And to doso would not be acting in form as you say, you don’t know the business,my dear fellow.... And there’s no escaping form, as you see,” Porfirymuttered, listening at the door through which a noise could be heard.
“Ah, they’re coming,” cried Raskolnikov. “You’ve sent for them! Youexpected them! Well, produce them all: your deputies, your witnesses,what you like!... I am ready!”
But at this moment a strange incident occurred, something so unexpectedthat neither Raskolnikov nor Porfiry Petrovitch could have looked forsuch a conclusion to their interview.
CHAPTER VI
When he remembered the scene afterwards, this is how Raskolnikov saw it.
The noise behind the door increased, and suddenly the door was opened alittle.
“What is it?” cried Porfiry Petrovitch, annoyed. “Why, I gave orders...”
For an instant there was no answer, but it was evident that there wereseveral persons at the door, and that they were apparently pushingsomebody back.
“What is it?” Porfiry Petrovitch repeated, uneasily.
“The prisoner Nikolay has been brought,” someone answered.
“He is not wanted! Take him away! Let him wait! What’s he doing here?How irregular!” cried Porfiry, rushing to the door.
“But he...” began the same voice, and suddenly ceased.
Two seconds, not more, were spent in actual struggle, then someone gavea violent shove, and then a man, very pale, strode into the room.
This man’s appearance was at first sight very strange. He staredstraight before him, as though seeing nothing. There was a determinedgleam in his eyes; at the same time there was a deathly pallor in hisface, as though he were being led to the scaffold. His white lips werefaintly twitching.
He was dressed like a workman and was of medium height, very young,slim, his hair cut in round crop, with thin spare features. The man whomhe had thrust back followed him into the room and succeeded in seizinghim by the shoulder; he was a warder; but Nikolay pulled his arm away.
Several persons crowded inquisitively into the doorway. Some of themtried to get in. All this took place almost instantaneously.
“Go away, it’s too soon! Wait till you are sent for!... Why have youbrought him so soon?” Porfiry Petrovitch muttered, extremely annoyed,and as it were thrown out of his reckoning.
But Nikolay suddenly knelt down.
“What’s the matter?” cried Porfiry, surprised.
“I am guilty! Mine is the sin! I am the murderer,” Nikolay articulatedsuddenly, rather breathless, but speaking fairly loudly.
For ten seconds there was silence as though all had been struck dumb;even the warder stepped back, mechanically retreated to the door, andstood immovable.
“What is it?” cried Porfiry Petrovitch, recovering from his momentarystupefaction.
“I... am the murderer,” repeated Nikolay, after a brief pause.
“What... you... what... whom did you kill?” Porfiry Petrovitch wasobviously bewildered.
Nikolay again was silent for a moment.
“Alyona Ivanovna and her sister Lizaveta Ivanovna, I... killed... withan axe. Darkness came over me,” he added suddenly, and was again silent.
He still remained on his knees. Porfiry Petrovitch stood for somemoments as though meditating, but suddenly roused himself and waved backthe uninvited spectators. They instantly vanished and closed the door.Then he looked towards Raskolnikov, who was standing in the corner,staring wildly at Nikolay and moved towards him, but stopped short,looked from Nikolay to Raskolnikov and then again at Nikolay, andseeming unable to restrain himself darted at the latter.
“You’re in too great a hurry,” he shouted at him, almost angrily. “Ididn’t ask you what came over you.... Speak, did you kill them?”
“I am the murderer.... I want to give evidence,” Nikolay pronounced.
“Ach! What did you kill them with?”
“An axe. I had it ready.”
“Ach, he is in a hurry! Alone?”
Nikolay did not understand the question.
“Did you do it alone?”
“Yes, alone. And Mitka is not guilty and had no share in it.”
“Don’t be in a hurry about Mitka! A-ach! How was it you ran downstairslike that at the time? The porters met you both!”
“It was to put them off the scent... I ran after Mitka,” Nikolay repliedhurriedly, as though he had prepared the answer.
“I knew it!” cried Porfiry, with vexation. “It’s not his own tale he istelling,” he muttered as though to himself, and suddenly his eyes restedon Raskolnikov again.
He was apparently so taken up with Nikolay that for a moment he hadforgotten Raskolnikov. He was a little taken aback.
“My dear Rodion Romanovitch, excuse me!” he flew up to him, “this won’tdo; I’m afraid you must go... it’s no good your staying... I will...you see, what a surprise!... Good-bye!”
And taking him by the arm, he showed him to the door.
“I suppose you didn’t expect it?” said Raskolnikov who, though he hadnot yet fully grasped the situation, had regained his courage.
“You did not expect it either, my friend. See how your hand istrembling! He-he!”
“You’re trembling, too, Porfiry Petrovitch!”
“Yes, I am; I didn’t expect it.”
They were already at the door; Porfiry was impatient for Raskolnikov tobe gone.
“And your little surprise, aren’t you going to show it to me?”Raskolnikov said, sarcastically.
“Why, his teeth are chattering as he asks, he-he! You are an ironicalperson! Come, till we meet!”
“I believe we can say _good-bye_!”
“That’s in God’s hands,” muttered Porfiry, with an unnatural smile.
As he walked through the office, Raskolnikov noticed that many peoplewere looking at him. Among them he saw the two porters from _the_ house,whom he had invited that night to the police station. They stood therewaiting. But he was no sooner on the stairs than he heard the voice ofPorfiry Petrovitch behind him. Turning round, he saw the latter runningafter him, out of breath.
“One word, Rodion Romanovitch; as to all the rest, it’s in God’s hands,but as a matter of form there are some questions I shall have to askyou... so we shall meet again, shan’t we?”
And Porfiry stood still, facing him with a smile.
“Shan’t we?” he added again.
He seemed to want to say something more, but could not speak out.
“You must forgive me, Porfiry Petrovitch, for what has just passed... Ilost my temper,” began Raskolnikov, who had so far regained his couragethat he felt irresistibly inclined to display his coolness.
“Don’t mention it, don’t mention it,” Porfiry replied, almost gleefully.“I myself, too... I have a wicked temper, I admit it! But we shall meetagain. If it’s God’s will, we may see a great deal of one another.”
“And will get to know each other through and through?” addedRaskolnikov.
“Yes; know each other through and through,” assented Porfiry Petrovitch,and he screwed up his eyes, looking earnestly at Raskolnikov. “Nowyou’re going to a birthday party?”
“To a funeral.”
“Of course, the funeral! Take care of yourself, and get well.”
“I don’t know what to wish you,” said Raskolnikov, who had begun todescend the stairs, but looked back again. “I should like to wish yousuccess, but your office is such a comical one.”
“Why comical?” Porfiry Petrovitch had turned to go, but he seemed toprick up his ears at this.
“Why, how you must have been torturing and harassing that poor Nikolaypsychologically, after your fashion, till he confessed! You must havebeen at him day and night, proving to him that he was the murderer, andnow that he has confessed, you’ll begin vivisecting him again. ‘You arelying,’ you’ll say. ‘You are not the murderer! You can’t be! It’s notyour own tale you are telling!’ You must admit it’s a comical business!”
“He-he-he! You noticed then that I said to Nikolay just now that it wasnot his own tale he was telling?”
“How could I help noticing it!”
“He-he! You are quick-witted. You notice everything! You’ve really aplayful mind! And you always fasten on the comic side... he-he! They saythat was the marked characteristic of Gogol, among the writers.”
“Yes, of Gogol.”
“Yes, of Gogol.... I shall look forward to meeting you.”
“So shall I.”
Raskolnikov walked straight home. He was so muddled and bewildered thaton getting home he sat for a quarter of an hour on the sofa, trying tocollect his thoughts. He did not attempt to think about Nikolay; hewas stupefied; he felt that his confession was something inexplicable,amazing--something beyond his understanding. But Nikolay’s confessionwas an actual fact. The consequences of this fact were clear to him atonce, its falsehood could not fail to be discovered, and then theywould be after him again. Till then, at least, he was free and must dosomething for himself, for the danger was imminent.
But how imminent? His position gradually became clear to him.Remembering, sketchily, the main outlines of his recent scene withPorfiry, he could not help shuddering again with horror. Of course,he did not yet know all Porfiry’s aims, he could not see into all hiscalculations. But he had already partly shown his hand, and no one knewbetter than Raskolnikov how terrible Porfiry’s “lead” had been forhim. A little more and he _might_ have given himself away completely,circumstantially. Knowing his nervous temperament and from the firstglance seeing through him, Porfiry, though playing a bold game, wasbound to win. There’s no denying that Raskolnikov had compromisedhimself seriously, but no _facts_ had come to light as yet; there wasnothing positive. But was he taking a true view of the position? Wasn’the mistaken? What had Porfiry been trying to get at? Had he really somesurprise prepared for him? And what was it? Had he really been expectingsomething or not? How would they have parted if it had not been for theunexpected appearance of Nikolay?
Porfiry had shown almost all his cards--of course, he had riskedsomething in showing them--and if he had really had anything up hissleeve (Raskolnikov reflected), he would have shown that, too. What wasthat “surprise”? Was it a joke? Had it meant anything? Could it haveconcealed anything like a fact, a piece of positive evidence? Hisyesterday’s visitor? What had become of him? Where was he to-day? IfPorfiry really had any evidence, it must be connected with him....
He sat on the sofa with his elbows on his knees and his face hidden inhis hands. He was still shivering nervously. At last he got up, took hiscap, thought a minute, and went to the door.
He had a sort of presentiment that for to-day, at least, he mightconsider himself out of danger. He had a sudden sense almost of joy; hewanted to make haste to Katerina Ivanovna’s. He would be too late forthe funeral, of course, but he would be in time for the memorial dinner,and there at once he would see Sonia.
He stood still, thought a moment, and a suffering smile came for amoment on to his lips.
“To-day! To-day,” he repeated to himself. “Yes, to-day! So it mustbe....”
But as he was about to open the door, it began opening of itself. Hestarted and moved back. The door opened gently and slowly, and theresuddenly appeared a figure--yesterday’s visitor _from underground_.
The man stood in the doorway, looked at Raskolnikov without speaking,and took a step forward into the room. He was exactly the same asyesterday; the same figure, the same dress, but there was a great changein his face; he looked dejected and sighed deeply. If he had only puthis hand up to his cheek and leaned his head on one side he would havelooked exactly like a peasant woman.
“What do you want?” asked Raskolnikov, numb with terror. The man wasstill silent, but suddenly he bowed down almost to the ground, touchingit with his finger.
“What is it?” cried Raskolnikov.
“I have sinned,” the man articulated softly.
“How?”
“By evil thoughts.”
They looked at one another.
“I was vexed. When you came, perhaps in drink, and bade the porters goto the police station and asked about the blood, I was vexed that theylet you go and took you for drunken. I was so vexed that I lost mysleep. And remembering the address we came here yesterday and asked foryou....”
“Who came?” Raskolnikov interrupted, instantly beginning to recollect.
“I did, I’ve wronged you.”
“Then you come from that house?”
“I was standing at the gate with them... don’t you remember? We havecarried on our trade in that house for years past. We cure and preparehides, we take work home... most of all I was vexed....”
And the whole scene of the day before yesterday in the gateway cameclearly before Raskolnikov’s mind; he recollected that there hadbeen several people there besides the porters, women among them.He remembered one voice had suggested taking him straight to thepolice-station. He could not recall the face of the speaker, and evennow he did not recognise it, but he remembered that he had turned roundand made him some answer....
So this was the solution of yesterday’s horror. The most awful thoughtwas that he had been actually almost lost, had almost done for himselfon account of such a _trivial_ circumstance. So this man could tellnothing except his asking about the flat and the blood stains. SoPorfiry, too, had nothing but that _delirium_, no facts but this_psychology_ which _cuts both ways_, nothing positive. So if no morefacts come to light (and they must not, they must not!) then... thenwhat can they do to him? How can they convict him, even if they arresthim? And Porfiry then had only just heard about the flat and had notknown about it before.
“Was it you who told Porfiry... that I’d been there?” he cried, struckby a sudden idea.
“What Porfiry?”
“The head of the detective department?”
“Yes. The porters did not go there, but I went.”
“To-day?”
“I got there two minutes before you. And I heard, I heard it all, how heworried you.”
“Where? What? When?”
“Why, in the next room. I was sitting there all the time.”
“What? Why, then you were the surprise? But how could it happen? Upon myword!”
“I saw that the porters did not want to do what I said,” began the man;“for it’s too late, said they, and maybe he’ll be angry that we did notcome at the time. I was vexed and I lost my sleep, and I began makinginquiries. And finding out yesterday where to go, I went to-day. Thefirst time I went he wasn’t there, when I came an hour later he couldn’tsee me. I went the third time, and they showed me in. I informed him ofeverything, just as it happened, and he began skipping about the roomand punching himself on the chest. ‘What do you scoundrels mean by it?If I’d known about it I should have arrested him!’ Then he ran out,called somebody and began talking to him in the corner, then he turnedto me, scolding and questioning me. He scolded me a great deal; and Itold him everything, and I told him that you didn’t dare to say a wordin answer to me yesterday and that you didn’t recognise me. And hefell to running about again and kept hitting himself on the chest, andgetting angry and running about, and when you were announced he toldme to go into the next room. ‘Sit there a bit,’ he said. ‘Don’t move,whatever you may hear.’ And he set a chair there for me and lockedme in. ‘Perhaps,’ he said, ‘I may call you.’ And when Nikolay’d beenbrought he let me out as soon as you were gone. ‘I shall send for youagain and question you,’ he said.”
“And did he question Nikolay while you were there?”
“He got rid of me as he did of you, before he spoke to Nikolay.”
The man stood still, and again suddenly bowed down, touching the groundwith his finger.
“Forgive me for my evil thoughts, and my slander.”
“May God forgive you,” answered Raskolnikov.
And as he said this, the man bowed down again, but not to the ground,turned slowly and went out of the room.
“It all cuts both ways, now it all cuts both ways,” repeatedRaskolnikov, and he went out more confident than ever.
“Now we’ll make a fight for it,” he said, with a malicious smile, as hewent down the stairs. His malice was aimed at himself; with shame andcontempt he recollected his “cowardice.”
