PART V
CHAPTER I
The morning that followed the fateful interview with Dounia andher mother brought sobering influences to bear on Pyotr Petrovitch.Intensely unpleasant as it was, he was forced little by little to acceptas a fact beyond recall what had seemed to him only the day beforefantastic and incredible. The black snake of wounded vanity had beengnawing at his heart all night. When he got out of bed, Pyotr Petrovitchimmediately looked in the looking-glass. He was afraid that he hadjaundice. However his health seemed unimpaired so far, and looking athis noble, clear-skinned countenance which had grown fattish oflate, Pyotr Petrovitch for an instant was positively comforted in theconviction that he would find another bride and, perhaps, even a betterone. But coming back to the sense of his present position, he turnedaside and spat vigorously, which excited a sarcastic smile in AndreySemyonovitch Lebeziatnikov, the young friend with whom he was staying.That smile Pyotr Petrovitch noticed, and at once set it down against hisyoung friend’s account. He had set down a good many points against himof late. His anger was redoubled when he reflected that he ought not tohave told Andrey Semyonovitch about the result of yesterday’s interview.That was the second mistake he had made in temper, through impulsivenessand irritability.... Moreover, all that morning one unpleasantnessfollowed another. He even found a hitch awaiting him in his legal casein the senate. He was particularly irritated by the owner of the flatwhich had been taken in view of his approaching marriage and was beingredecorated at his own expense; the owner, a rich German tradesman,would not entertain the idea of breaking the contract which had justbeen signed and insisted on the full forfeit money, though PyotrPetrovitch would be giving him back the flat practically redecorated. Inthe same way the upholsterers refused to return a single rouble of theinstalment paid for the furniture purchased but not yet removed to theflat.
“Am I to get married simply for the sake of the furniture?” PyotrPetrovitch ground his teeth and at the same time once more he had agleam of desperate hope. “Can all that be really so irrevocably over?Is it no use to make another effort?” The thought of Dounia sent avoluptuous pang through his heart. He endured anguish at that moment,and if it had been possible to slay Raskolnikov instantly by wishing it,Pyotr Petrovitch would promptly have uttered the wish.
“It was my mistake, too, not to have given them money,” he thought, ashe returned dejectedly to Lebeziatnikov’s room, “and why on earth was Isuch a Jew? It was false economy! I meant to keep them without a pennyso that they should turn to me as their providence, and look at them!foo! If I’d spent some fifteen hundred roubles on them for the trousseauand presents, on knick-knacks, dressing-cases, jewellery, materials, andall that sort of trash from Knopp’s and the English shop, my positionwould have been better and... stronger! They could not have refused meso easily! They are the sort of people that would feel bound to returnmoney and presents if they broke it off; and they would find it hard todo it! And their conscience would prick them: how can we dismiss a manwho has hitherto been so generous and delicate?.... H’m! I’ve made ablunder.”
And grinding his teeth again, Pyotr Petrovitch called himself afool--but not aloud, of course.
He returned home, twice as irritated and angry as before. Thepreparations for the funeral dinner at Katerina Ivanovna’s excitedhis curiosity as he passed. He had heard about it the day before; hefancied, indeed, that he had been invited, but absorbed in his own careshe had paid no attention. Inquiring of Madame Lippevechsel who was busylaying the table while Katerina Ivanovna was away at the cemetery, heheard that the entertainment was to be a great affair, that all thelodgers had been invited, among them some who had not known the deadman, that even Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov was invited in spite ofhis previous quarrel with Katerina Ivanovna, that he, Pyotr Petrovitch,was not only invited, but was eagerly expected as he was the mostimportant of the lodgers. Amalia Ivanovna herself had been invited withgreat ceremony in spite of the recent unpleasantness, and so she wasvery busy with preparations and was taking a positive pleasure in them;she was moreover dressed up to the nines, all in new black silk, and shewas proud of it. All this suggested an idea to Pyotr Petrovitch and hewent into his room, or rather Lebeziatnikov’s, somewhat thoughtful. Hehad learnt that Raskolnikov was to be one of the guests.
Andrey Semyonovitch had been at home all the morning. The attitude ofPyotr Petrovitch to this gentleman was strange, though perhaps natural.Pyotr Petrovitch had despised and hated him from the day he came to staywith him and at the same time he seemed somewhat afraid of him. Hehad not come to stay with him on his arrival in Petersburg simply fromparsimony, though that had been perhaps his chief object. He had heardof Andrey Semyonovitch, who had once been his ward, as a leading youngprogressive who was taking an important part in certain interestingcircles, the doings of which were a legend in the provinces. It hadimpressed Pyotr Petrovitch. These powerful omniscient circles whodespised everyone and showed everyone up had long inspired in him apeculiar but quite vague alarm. He had not, of course, been able to formeven an approximate notion of what they meant. He, like everyone, hadheard that there were, especially in Petersburg, progressives of somesort, nihilists and so on, and, like many people, he exaggerated anddistorted the significance of those words to an absurd degree. What formany years past he had feared more than anything was _being shownup_ and this was the chief ground for his continual uneasiness at thethought of transferring his business to Petersburg. He was afraid ofthis as little children are sometimes panic-stricken. Some years before,when he was just entering on his own career, he had come upon two casesin which rather important personages in the province, patrons of his,had been cruelly shown up. One instance had ended in great scandalfor the person attacked and the other had very nearly ended in serioustrouble. For this reason Pyotr Petrovitch intended to go into thesubject as soon as he reached Petersburg and, if necessary, toanticipate contingencies by seeking the favour of “our youngergeneration.” He relied on Andrey Semyonovitch for this and beforehis visit to Raskolnikov he had succeeded in picking up some currentphrases. He soon discovered that Andrey Semyonovitch was a commonplacesimpleton, but that by no means reassured Pyotr Petrovitch. Even if hehad been certain that all the progressives were fools like him, itwould not have allayed his uneasiness. All the doctrines, the ideas, thesystems, with which Andrey Semyonovitch pestered him had no interest forhim. He had his own object--he simply wanted to find out at once whatwas happening _here_. Had these people any power or not? Had he anythingto fear from them? Would they expose any enterprise of his? And whatprecisely was now the object of their attacks? Could he somehow make upto them and get round them if they really were powerful? Was this thething to do or not? Couldn’t he gain something through them? In facthundreds of questions presented themselves.
Andrey Semyonovitch was an anæmic, scrofulous little man, with strangelyflaxen mutton-chop whiskers of which he was very proud. He was a clerkand had almost always something wrong with his eyes. He was rathersoft-hearted, but self-confident and sometimes extremely conceited inspeech, which had an absurd effect, incongruous with his little figure.He was one of the lodgers most respected by Amalia Ivanovna, for he didnot get drunk and paid regularly for his lodgings. Andrey Semyonovitchreally was rather stupid; he attached himself to the cause of progressand “our younger generation” from enthusiasm. He was one of the numerousand varied legion of dullards, of half-animate abortions, conceited,half-educated coxcombs, who attach themselves to the idea most infashion only to vulgarise it and who caricature every cause they serve,however sincerely.
Though Lebeziatnikov was so good-natured, he, too, was beginning todislike Pyotr Petrovitch. This happened on both sides unconsciously.However simple Andrey Semyonovitch might be, he began to see that PyotrPetrovitch was duping him and secretly despising him, and that “he wasnot the right sort of man.” He had tried expounding to him the system ofFourier and the Darwinian theory, but of late Pyotr Petrovitch began tolisten too sarcastically and even to be rude. The fact was he had beguninstinctively to guess that Lebeziatnikov was not merely a commonplacesimpleton, but, perhaps, a liar, too, and that he had no connections ofany consequence even in his own circle, but had simply picked things upthird-hand; and that very likely he did not even know much about his ownwork of propaganda, for he was in too great a muddle. A fine person hewould be to show anyone up! It must be noted, by the way, that PyotrPetrovitch had during those ten days eagerly accepted the strangestpraise from Andrey Semyonovitch; he had not protested, for instance,when Andrey Semyonovitch belauded him for being ready to contribute tothe establishment of the new “commune,” or to abstain from christeninghis future children, or to acquiesce if Dounia were to take a lover amonth after marriage, and so on. Pyotr Petrovitch so enjoyed hearinghis own praises that he did not disdain even such virtues when they wereattributed to him.
Pyotr Petrovitch had had occasion that morning to realise somefive-per-cent bonds and now he sat down to the table and counted overbundles of notes. Andrey Semyonovitch who hardly ever had any moneywalked about the room pretending to himself to look at all those banknotes with indifference and even contempt. Nothing would have convincedPyotr Petrovitch that Andrey Semyonovitch could really look on the moneyunmoved, and the latter, on his side, kept thinking bitterly that PyotrPetrovitch was capable of entertaining such an idea about him andwas, perhaps, glad of the opportunity of teasing his young friend byreminding him of his inferiority and the great difference between them.
He found him incredibly inattentive and irritable, though he, AndreySemyonovitch, began enlarging on his favourite subject, the foundationof a new special “commune.” The brief remarks that dropped from PyotrPetrovitch between the clicking of the beads on the reckoning framebetrayed unmistakable and discourteous irony. But the “humane” AndreySemyonovitch ascribed Pyotr Petrovitch’s ill-humour to his recent breachwith Dounia and he was burning with impatience to discourse on thattheme. He had something progressive to say on the subject whichmight console his worthy friend and “could not fail” to promote hisdevelopment.
“There is some sort of festivity being prepared at that... at thewidow’s, isn’t there?” Pyotr Petrovitch asked suddenly, interruptingAndrey Semyonovitch at the most interesting passage.
“Why, don’t you know? Why, I was telling you last night what I thinkabout all such ceremonies. And she invited you too, I heard. You weretalking to her yesterday...”
“I should never have expected that beggarly fool would have spent onthis feast all the money she got from that other fool, Raskolnikov. Iwas surprised just now as I came through at the preparations there, thewines! Several people are invited. It’s beyond everything!” continuedPyotr Petrovitch, who seemed to have some object in pursuing theconversation. “What? You say I am asked too? When was that? I don’tremember. But I shan’t go. Why should I? I only said a word to her inpassing yesterday of the possibility of her obtaining a year’s salary asa destitute widow of a government clerk. I suppose she has invited me onthat account, hasn’t she? He-he-he!”
“I don’t intend to go either,” said Lebeziatnikov.
“I should think not, after giving her a thrashing! You might wellhesitate, he-he!”
“Who thrashed? Whom?” cried Lebeziatnikov, flustered and blushing.
“Why, you thrashed Katerina Ivanovna a month ago. I heard soyesterday... so that’s what your convictions amount to... and the womanquestion, too, wasn’t quite sound, he-he-he!” and Pyotr Petrovitch, asthough comforted, went back to clicking his beads.
“It’s all slander and nonsense!” cried Lebeziatnikov, who was alwaysafraid of allusions to the subject. “It was not like that at all, itwas quite different. You’ve heard it wrong; it’s a libel. I was simplydefending myself. She rushed at me first with her nails, she pulledout all my whiskers.... It’s permissable for anyone, I should hope,to defend himself and I never allow anyone to use violence to me onprinciple, for it’s an act of despotism. What was I to do? I simplypushed her back.”
“He-he-he!” Luzhin went on laughing maliciously.
“You keep on like that because you are out of humour yourself.... Butthat’s nonsense and it has nothing, nothing whatever to do with thewoman question! You don’t understand; I used to think, indeed, thatif women are equal to men in all respects, even in strength (as ismaintained now) there ought to be equality in that, too. Of course, Ireflected afterwards that such a question ought not really to arise,for there ought not to be fighting and in the future society fighting isunthinkable... and that it would be a queer thing to seek for equalityin fighting. I am not so stupid... though, of course, there isfighting... there won’t be later, but at present there is... confoundit! How muddled one gets with you! It’s not on that account that Iam not going. I am not going on principle, not to take part in therevolting convention of memorial dinners, that’s why! Though, of course,one might go to laugh at it.... I am sorry there won’t be any priests atit. I should certainly go if there were.”
“Then you would sit down at another man’s table and insult it and thosewho invited you. Eh?”
“Certainly not insult, but protest. I should do it with a good object. Imight indirectly assist the cause of enlightenment and propaganda. It’sa duty of every man to work for enlightenment and propaganda and themore harshly, perhaps, the better. I might drop a seed, an idea.... Andsomething might grow up from that seed. How should I be insulting them?They might be offended at first, but afterwards they’d see I’d done thema service. You know, Terebyeva (who is in the community now) was blamedbecause when she left her family and... devoted... herself, she wrote toher father and mother that she wouldn’t go on living conventionally andwas entering on a free marriage and it was said that that was too harsh,that she might have spared them and have written more kindly. I thinkthat’s all nonsense and there’s no need of softness; on the contrary,what’s wanted is protest. Varents had been married seven years, sheabandoned her two children, she told her husband straight out in aletter: ‘I have realised that I cannot be happy with you. I can neverforgive you that you have deceived me by concealing from me that thereis another organisation of society by means of the communities. I haveonly lately learned it from a great-hearted man to whom I have givenmyself and with whom I am establishing a community. I speak plainlybecause I consider it dishonest to deceive you. Do as you think best.Do not hope to get me back, you are too late. I hope you will be happy.’That’s how letters like that ought to be written!”
“Is that Terebyeva the one you said had made a third free marriage?”
“No, it’s only the second, really! But what if it were the fourth, whatif it were the fifteenth, that’s all nonsense! And if ever I regrettedthe death of my father and mother, it is now, and I sometimes thinkif my parents were living what a protest I would have aimed at them! Iwould have done something on purpose... I would have shown them! I wouldhave astonished them! I am really sorry there is no one!”
“To surprise! He-he! Well, be that as you will,” Pyotr Petrovitchinterrupted, “but tell me this; do you know the dead man’s daughter, thedelicate-looking little thing? It’s true what they say about her, isn’tit?”
“What of it? I think, that is, it is my own personal conviction thatthis is the normal condition of women. Why not? I mean, _distinguons_.In our present society it is not altogether normal, because it iscompulsory, but in the future society it will be perfectly normal,because it will be voluntary. Even as it is, she was quite right: shewas suffering and that was her asset, so to speak, her capital whichshe had a perfect right to dispose of. Of course, in the futuresociety there will be no need of assets, but her part will have anothersignificance, rational and in harmony with her environment. As to SofyaSemyonovna personally, I regard her action as a vigorous protest againstthe organisation of society, and I respect her deeply for it; I rejoiceindeed when I look at her!”
“I was told that you got her turned out of these lodgings.”
Lebeziatnikov was enraged.
“That’s another slander,” he yelled. “It was not so at all! That was allKaterina Ivanovna’s invention, for she did not understand! And I nevermade love to Sofya Semyonovna! I was simply developing her, entirelydisinterestedly, trying to rouse her to protest.... All I wanted was herprotest and Sofya Semyonovna could not have remained here anyway!”
“Have you asked her to join your community?”
“You keep on laughing and very inappropriately, allow me to tellyou. You don’t understand! There is no such rôle in a community. Thecommunity is established that there should be no such rôles. In acommunity, such a rôle is essentially transformed and what is stupidhere is sensible there, what, under present conditions, is unnaturalbecomes perfectly natural in the community. It all depends on theenvironment. It’s all the environment and man himself is nothing. AndI am on good terms with Sofya Semyonovna to this day, which is a proofthat she never regarded me as having wronged her. I am trying now toattract her to the community, but on quite, quite a different footing.What are you laughing at? We are trying to establish a community ofour own, a special one, on a broader basis. We have gone further in ourconvictions. We reject more! And meanwhile I’m still developing SofyaSemyonovna. She has a beautiful, beautiful character!”
“And you take advantage of her fine character, eh? He-he!”
“No, no! Oh, no! On the contrary.”
“Oh, on the contrary! He-he-he! A queer thing to say!”
“Believe me! Why should I disguise it? In fact, I feel it strange myselfhow timid, chaste and modern she is with me!”
“And you, of course, are developing her... he-he! trying to prove to herthat all that modesty is nonsense?”
“Not at all, not at all! How coarsely, how stupidly--excuse me sayingso--you misunderstand the word development! Good heavens, how... crudeyou still are! We are striving for the freedom of women and you haveonly one idea in your head.... Setting aside the general questionof chastity and feminine modesty as useless in themselves and indeedprejudices, I fully accept her chastity with me, because that’s for herto decide. Of course if she were to tell me herself that she wanted me,I should think myself very lucky, because I like the girl very much; butas it is, no one has ever treated her more courteously than I, with morerespect for her dignity... I wait in hopes, that’s all!”
“You had much better make her a present of something. I bet you neverthought of that.”
“You don’t understand, as I’ve told you already! Of course, she is insuch a position, but it’s another question. Quite another question!You simply despise her. Seeing a fact which you mistakenly considerdeserving of contempt, you refuse to take a humane view of a fellowcreature. You don’t know what a character she is! I am only sorry thatof late she has quite given up reading and borrowing books. I usedto lend them to her. I am sorry, too, that with all the energy andresolution in protesting--which she has already shown once--she haslittle self-reliance, little, so to say, independence, so as tobreak free from certain prejudices and certain foolish ideas. Yet shethoroughly understands some questions, for instance about kissing ofhands, that is, that it’s an insult to a woman for a man to kiss herhand, because it’s a sign of inequality. We had a debate about it andI described it to her. She listened attentively to an account of theworkmen’s associations in France, too. Now I am explaining the questionof coming into the room in the future society.”
“And what’s that, pray?”
“We had a debate lately on the question: Has a member of the communitythe right to enter another member’s room, whether man or woman, at anytime... and we decided that he has!”
“It might be at an inconvenient moment, he-he!”
Lebeziatnikov was really angry.
“You are always thinking of something unpleasant,” he cried withaversion. “Tfoo! How vexed I am that when I was expounding our system, Ireferred prematurely to the question of personal privacy! It’s alwaysa stumbling-block to people like you, they turn it into ridicule beforethey understand it. And how proud they are of it, too! Tfoo! I’ve oftenmaintained that that question should not be approached by a novice tillhe has a firm faith in the system. And tell me, please, what do youfind so shameful even in cesspools? I should be the first to be readyto clean out any cesspool you like. And it’s not a question ofself-sacrifice, it’s simply work, honourable, useful work which isas good as any other and much better than the work of a Raphael and aPushkin, because it is more useful.”
“And more honourable, more honourable, he-he-he!”
“What do you mean by ‘more honourable’? I don’t understand suchexpressions to describe human activity. ‘More honourable,’ ‘nobler’--allthose are old-fashioned prejudices which I reject. Everything which is_of use_ to mankind is honourable. I only understand one word: _useful_!You can snigger as much as you like, but that’s so!”
Pyotr Petrovitch laughed heartily. He had finished counting the moneyand was putting it away. But some of the notes he left on the table. The“cesspool question” had already been a subject of dispute between them.What was absurd was that it made Lebeziatnikov really angry, while itamused Luzhin and at that moment he particularly wanted to anger hisyoung friend.
“It’s your ill-luck yesterday that makes you so ill-humoured andannoying,” blurted out Lebeziatnikov, who in spite of his “independence”and his “protests” did not venture to oppose Pyotr Petrovitch and stillbehaved to him with some of the respect habitual in earlier years.
“You’d better tell me this,” Pyotr Petrovitch interrupted with haughtydispleasure, “can you... or rather are you really friendly enough withthat young person to ask her to step in here for a minute? I thinkthey’ve all come back from the cemetery... I heard the sound ofsteps... I want to see her, that young person.”
“What for?” Lebeziatnikov asked with surprise.
“Oh, I want to. I am leaving here to-day or to-morrow and therefore Iwanted to speak to her about... However, you may be present during theinterview. It’s better you should be, indeed. For there’s no knowingwhat you might imagine.”
“I shan’t imagine anything. I only asked and, if you’ve anything to sayto her, nothing is easier than to call her in. I’ll go directly and youmay be sure I won’t be in your way.”
Five minutes later Lebeziatnikov came in with Sonia. She came in verymuch surprised and overcome with shyness as usual. She was always shy insuch circumstances and was always afraid of new people, she had been asa child and was even more so now.... Pyotr Petrovitch met her “politelyand affably,” but with a certain shade of bantering familiarity which inhis opinion was suitable for a man of his respectability and weightin dealing with a creature so young and so _interesting_ as she. Hehastened to “reassure” her and made her sit down facing him at thetable. Sonia sat down, looked about her--at Lebeziatnikov, at the noteslying on the table and then again at Pyotr Petrovitch and her eyesremained riveted on him. Lebeziatnikov was moving to the door. PyotrPetrovitch signed to Sonia to remain seated and stopped Lebeziatnikov.
“Is Raskolnikov in there? Has he come?” he asked him in a whisper.
“Raskolnikov? Yes. Why? Yes, he is there. I saw him just come in....Why?”
“Well, I particularly beg you to remain here with us and not to leaveme alone with this... young woman. I only want a few words with her,but God knows what they may make of it. I shouldn’t like Raskolnikov torepeat anything.... You understand what I mean?”
“I understand!” Lebeziatnikov saw the point. “Yes, you are right.... Ofcourse, I am convinced personally that you have no reason to be uneasy,but... still, you are right. Certainly I’ll stay. I’ll stand here at thewindow and not be in your way... I think you are right...”
Pyotr Petrovitch returned to the sofa, sat down opposite Sonia, lookedattentively at her and assumed an extremely dignified, even severeexpression, as much as to say, “don’t you make any mistake, madam.”Sonia was overwhelmed with embarrassment.
“In the first place, Sofya Semyonovna, will you make my excuses to yourrespected mamma.... That’s right, isn’t it? Katerina Ivanovna standsin the place of a mother to you?” Pyotr Petrovitch began with greatdignity, though affably.
It was evident that his intentions were friendly.
“Quite so, yes; the place of a mother,” Sonia answered, timidly andhurriedly.
“Then will you make my apologies to her? Through inevitablecircumstances I am forced to be absent and shall not be at the dinner inspite of your mamma’s kind invitation.”
“Yes... I’ll tell her... at once.”
And Sonia hastily jumped up from her seat.
“Wait, that’s not all,” Pyotr Petrovitch detained her, smiling at hersimplicity and ignorance of good manners, “and you know me little, mydear Sofya Semyonovna, if you suppose I would have ventured to troublea person like you for a matter of so little consequence affecting myselfonly. I have another object.”
Sonia sat down hurriedly. Her eyes rested again for an instant on thegrey-and-rainbow-coloured notes that remained on the table, but shequickly looked away and fixed her eyes on Pyotr Petrovitch. She felt ithorribly indecorous, especially for _her_, to look at another person’smoney. She stared at the gold eye-glass which Pyotr Petrovitch heldin his left hand and at the massive and extremely handsome ring with ayellow stone on his middle finger. But suddenly she looked away and, notknowing where to turn, ended by staring Pyotr Petrovitch again straightin the face. After a pause of still greater dignity he continued.
“I chanced yesterday in passing to exchange a couple of words withKaterina Ivanovna, poor woman. That was sufficient to enable me toascertain that she is in a position--preternatural, if one may soexpress it.”
“Yes... preternatural...” Sonia hurriedly assented.
“Or it would be simpler and more comprehensible to say, ill.”
“Yes, simpler and more comprehen... yes, ill.”
“Quite so. So then from a feeling of humanity and so to speakcompassion, I should be glad to be of service to her in any way,foreseeing her unfortunate position. I believe the whole of thispoverty-stricken family depends now entirely on you?”
“Allow me to ask,” Sonia rose to her feet, “did you say something to heryesterday of the possibility of a pension? Because she told me you hadundertaken to get her one. Was that true?”
“Not in the slightest, and indeed it’s an absurdity! I merely hinted ather obtaining temporary assistance as the widow of an official who haddied in the service--if only she has patronage... but apparently yourlate parent had not served his full term and had not indeed been in theservice at all of late. In fact, if there could be any hope, it would bevery ephemeral, because there would be no claim for assistance inthat case, far from it.... And she is dreaming of a pension already,he-he-he!... A go-ahead lady!”
“Yes, she is. For she is credulous and good-hearted, and she believeseverything from the goodness of her heart and... and... and she is likethat... yes... You must excuse her,” said Sonia, and again she got up togo.
“But you haven’t heard what I have to say.”
“No, I haven’t heard,” muttered Sonia.
“Then sit down.” She was terribly confused; she sat down again a thirdtime.
“Seeing her position with her unfortunate little ones, I should be glad,as I have said before, so far as lies in my power, to be of service,that is, so far as is in my power, not more. One might for instance getup a subscription for her, or a lottery, something of the sort, such asis always arranged in such cases by friends or even outsiders desirousof assisting people. It was of that I intended to speak to you; it mightbe done.”
“Yes, yes... God will repay you for it,” faltered Sonia, gazing intentlyat Pyotr Petrovitch.
“It might be, but we will talk of it later. We might begin it to-day, wewill talk it over this evening and lay the foundation so to speak. Cometo me at seven o’clock. Mr. Lebeziatnikov, I hope, will assist us. Butthere is one circumstance of which I ought to warn you beforehand andfor which I venture to trouble you, Sofya Semyonovna, to come here. Inmy opinion money cannot be, indeed it’s unsafe to put it into KaterinaIvanovna’s own hands. The dinner to-day is a proof of that. Though shehas not, so to speak, a crust of bread for to-morrow and... well, bootsor shoes, or anything; she has bought to-day Jamaica rum, and even,I believe, Madeira and... and coffee. I saw it as I passed through.To-morrow it will all fall upon you again, they won’t have a crust ofbread. It’s absurd, really, and so, to my thinking, a subscription oughtto be raised so that the unhappy widow should not know of the money, butonly you, for instance. Am I right?”
“I don’t know... this is only to-day, once in her life.... She wasso anxious to do honour, to celebrate the memory.... And she is verysensible... but just as you think and I shall be very, very... they willall be... and God will reward... and the orphans...”
Sonia burst into tears.
“Very well, then, keep it in mind; and now will you accept for thebenefit of your relation the small sum that I am able to spare, from mepersonally. I am very anxious that my name should not be mentioned inconnection with it. Here... having so to speak anxieties of my own, Icannot do more...”
And Pyotr Petrovitch held out to Sonia a ten-rouble note carefullyunfolded. Sonia took it, flushed crimson, jumped up, muttered somethingand began taking leave. Pyotr Petrovitch accompanied her ceremoniouslyto the door. She got out of the room at last, agitated and distressed,and returned to Katerina Ivanovna, overwhelmed with confusion.
All this time Lebeziatnikov had stood at the window or walked about theroom, anxious not to interrupt the conversation; when Sonia had gone hewalked up to Pyotr Petrovitch and solemnly held out his hand.
“I heard and _saw_ everything,” he said, laying stress on the last verb.“That is honourable, I mean to say, it’s humane! You wanted to avoidgratitude, I saw! And although I cannot, I confess, in principlesympathise with private charity, for it not only fails to eradicate theevil but even promotes it, yet I must admit that I saw your action withpleasure--yes, yes, I like it.”
“That’s all nonsense,” muttered Pyotr Petrovitch, somewhat disconcerted,looking carefully at Lebeziatnikov.
“No, it’s not nonsense! A man who has suffered distress and annoyance asyou did yesterday and who yet can sympathise with the misery of others,such a man... even though he is making a social mistake--is stilldeserving of respect! I did not expect it indeed of you, PyotrPetrovitch, especially as according to your ideas... oh, what a drawbackyour ideas are to you! How distressed you are for instance by yourill-luck yesterday,” cried the simple-hearted Lebeziatnikov, who felta return of affection for Pyotr Petrovitch. “And, what do you want withmarriage, with _legal_ marriage, my dear, noble Pyotr Petrovitch? Why doyou cling to this _legality_ of marriage? Well, you may beat me if youlike, but I am glad, positively glad it hasn’t come off, that you arefree, that you are not quite lost for humanity.... you see, I’ve spokenmy mind!”
“Because I don’t want in your free marriage to be made a fool of andto bring up another man’s children, that’s why I want legal marriage,”Luzhin replied in order to make some answer.
He seemed preoccupied by something.
“Children? You referred to children,” Lebeziatnikov started off likea warhorse at the trumpet call. “Children are a social question and aquestion of first importance, I agree; but the question of children hasanother solution. Some refuse to have children altogether, because theysuggest the institution of the family. We’ll speak of children later,but now as to the question of honour, I confess that’s my weak point.That horrid, military, Pushkin expression is unthinkable in thedictionary of the future. What does it mean indeed? It’s nonsense,there will be no deception in a free marriage! That is only the naturalconsequence of a legal marriage, so to say, its corrective, a protest.So that indeed it’s not humiliating... and if I ever, to suppose anabsurdity, were to be legally married, I should be positively glad ofit. I should say to my wife: ‘My dear, hitherto I have loved you, nowI respect you, for you’ve shown you can protest!’ You laugh! That’sbecause you are incapable of getting away from prejudices. Confoundit all! I understand now where the unpleasantness is of being deceivedin a legal marriage, but it’s simply a despicable consequence of adespicable position in which both are humiliated. When the deception isopen, as in a free marriage, then it does not exist, it’s unthinkable.Your wife will only prove how she respects you by considering youincapable of opposing her happiness and avenging yourself on her forher new husband. Damn it all! I sometimes dream if I were to be married,pfoo! I mean if I were to marry, legally or not, it’s just the same,I should present my wife with a lover if she had not found one forherself. ‘My dear,’ I should say, ‘I love you, but even more than that Idesire you to respect me. See!’ Am I not right?”
Pyotr Petrovitch sniggered as he listened, but without much merriment.He hardly heard it indeed. He was preoccupied with something else andeven Lebeziatnikov at last noticed it. Pyotr Petrovitch seemed excitedand rubbed his hands. Lebeziatnikov remembered all this and reflectedupon it afterwards.
CHAPTER II
It would be difficult to explain exactly what could have originated theidea of that senseless dinner in Katerina Ivanovna’s disordered brain.Nearly ten of the twenty roubles, given by Raskolnikov for Marmeladov’sfuneral, were wasted upon it. Possibly Katerina Ivanovna felt obliged tohonour the memory of the deceased “suitably,” that all the lodgers,and still more Amalia Ivanovna, might know “that he was in no way theirinferior, and perhaps very much their superior,” and that no one had theright “to turn up his nose at him.” Perhaps the chief element was thatpeculiar “poor man’s pride,” which compels many poor people to spendtheir last savings on some traditional social ceremony, simply in orderto do “like other people,” and not to “be looked down upon.” It is veryprobable, too, that Katerina Ivanovna longed on this occasion, atthe moment when she seemed to be abandoned by everyone, to show those“wretched contemptible lodgers” that she knew “how to do things, howto entertain” and that she had been brought up “in a genteel, she mightalmost say aristocratic colonel’s family” and had not been meant forsweeping floors and washing the children’s rags at night. Even thepoorest and most broken-spirited people are sometimes liable to theseparoxysms of pride and vanity which take the form of an irresistiblenervous craving. And Katerina Ivanovna was not broken-spirited; shemight have been killed by circumstance, but her spirit could not havebeen broken, that is, she could not have been intimidated, her willcould not be crushed. Moreover Sonia had said with good reason that hermind was unhinged. She could not be said to be insane, but for a yearpast she had been so harassed that her mind might well be overstrained.The later stages of consumption are apt, doctors tell us, to affect theintellect.
There was no great variety of wines, nor was there Madeira; but winethere was. There was vodka, rum and Lisbon wine, all of the poorestquality but in sufficient quantity. Besides the traditional rice andhoney, there were three or four dishes, one of which consisted ofpancakes, all prepared in Amalia Ivanovna’s kitchen. Two samovars wereboiling, that tea and punch might be offered after dinner. KaterinaIvanovna had herself seen to purchasing the provisions, with the helpof one of the lodgers, an unfortunate little Pole who had somehow beenstranded at Madame Lippevechsel’s. He promptly put himself at KaterinaIvanovna’s disposal and had been all that morning and all the day beforerunning about as fast as his legs could carry him, and very anxiousthat everyone should be aware of it. For every trifle he ran to KaterinaIvanovna, even hunting her out at the bazaar, at every instant calledher “_Pani_.” She was heartily sick of him before the end, thoughshe had declared at first that she could not have got on without this“serviceable and magnanimous man.” It was one of Katerina Ivanovna’scharacteristics to paint everyone she met in the most glowing colours.Her praises were so exaggerated as sometimes to be embarrassing; shewould invent various circumstances to the credit of her new acquaintanceand quite genuinely believe in their reality. Then all of a sudden shewould be disillusioned and would rudely and contemptuously repulse theperson she had only a few hours before been literally adoring. Shewas naturally of a gay, lively and peace-loving disposition, but fromcontinual failures and misfortunes she had come to desire so _keenly_that all should live in peace and joy and should not _dare_ to break thepeace, that the slightest jar, the smallest disaster reduced her almostto frenzy, and she would pass in an instant from the brightest hopes andfancies to cursing her fate and raving, and knocking her head againstthe wall.
Amalia Ivanovna, too, suddenly acquired extraordinary importance inKaterina Ivanovna’s eyes and was treated by her with extraordinaryrespect, probably only because Amalia Ivanovna had thrown herself heartand soul into the preparations. She had undertaken to lay the table,to provide the linen, crockery, etc., and to cook the dishes in herkitchen, and Katerina Ivanovna had left it all in her hands and goneherself to the cemetery. Everything had been well done. Even thetable-cloth was nearly clean; the crockery, knives, forks and glasseswere, of course, of all shapes and patterns, lent by different lodgers,but the table was properly laid at the time fixed, and Amalia Ivanovna,feeling she had done her work well, had put on a black silk dress anda cap with new mourning ribbons and met the returning party with somepride. This pride, though justifiable, displeased Katerina Ivanovna forsome reason: “as though the table could not have been laid except byAmalia Ivanovna!” She disliked the cap with new ribbons, too. “Could shebe stuck up, the stupid German, because she was mistress of the house,and had consented as a favour to help her poor lodgers! As a favour!Fancy that! Katerina Ivanovna’s father who had been a colonel and almosta governor had sometimes had the table set for forty persons, and thenanyone like Amalia Ivanovna, or rather Ludwigovna, would not have beenallowed into the kitchen.”
Katerina Ivanovna, however, put off expressing her feelings for thetime and contented herself with treating her coldly, though she decidedinwardly that she would certainly have to put Amalia Ivanovna downand set her in her proper place, for goodness only knew what she wasfancying herself. Katerina Ivanovna was irritated too by the fact thathardly any of the lodgers invited had come to the funeral, exceptthe Pole who had just managed to run into the cemetery, while to thememorial dinner the poorest and most insignificant of them had turnedup, the wretched creatures, many of them not quite sober. The olderand more respectable of them all, as if by common consent, stayed away.Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin, for instance, who might be said to be the mostrespectable of all the lodgers, did not appear, though Katerina Ivanovnahad the evening before told all the world, that is Amalia Ivanovna,Polenka, Sonia and the Pole, that he was the most generous,noble-hearted man with a large property and vast connections, who hadbeen a friend of her first husband’s, and a guest in her father’shouse, and that he had promised to use all his influence to secure hera considerable pension. It must be noted that when Katerina Ivanovnaexalted anyone’s connections and fortune, it was without any ulteriormotive, quite disinterestedly, for the mere pleasure of adding tothe consequence of the person praised. Probably “taking his cue” fromLuzhin, “that contemptible wretch Lebeziatnikov had not turned upeither. What did he fancy himself? He was only asked out of kindnessand because he was sharing the same room with Pyotr Petrovitch and was afriend of his, so that it would have been awkward not to invite him.”
Among those who failed to appear were “the genteel lady and herold-maidish daughter,” who had only been lodgers in the house for thelast fortnight, but had several times complained of the noise and uproarin Katerina Ivanovna’s room, especially when Marmeladov had comeback drunk. Katerina Ivanovna heard this from Amalia Ivanovna who,quarrelling with Katerina Ivanovna, and threatening to turn the wholefamily out of doors, had shouted at her that they “were not worth thefoot” of the honourable lodgers whom they were disturbing. KaterinaIvanovna determined now to invite this lady and her daughter, “whosefoot she was not worth,” and who had turned away haughtily when shecasually met them, so that they might know that “she was more noble inher thoughts and feelings and did not harbour malice,” and might seethat she was not accustomed to her way of living. She had proposed tomake this clear to them at dinner with allusions to her late father’sgovernorship, and also at the same time to hint that it was exceedinglystupid of them to turn away on meeting her. The fat colonel-major (hewas really a discharged officer of low rank) was also absent, but itappeared that he had been “not himself” for the last two days. The partyconsisted of the Pole, a wretched looking clerk with a spotty face anda greasy coat, who had not a word to say for himself, and smeltabominably, a deaf and almost blind old man who had once been in thepost office and who had been from immemorial ages maintained by someoneat Amalia Ivanovna’s.
A retired clerk of the commissariat department came, too; he wasdrunk, had a loud and most unseemly laugh and only fancy--was withouta waistcoat! One of the visitors sat straight down to the table withouteven greeting Katerina Ivanovna. Finally one person having no suitappeared in his dressing-gown, but this was too much, and the efforts ofAmalia Ivanovna and the Pole succeeded in removing him. The Pole broughtwith him, however, two other Poles who did not live at Amalia Ivanovna’sand whom no one had seen here before. All this irritated KaterinaIvanovna intensely. “For whom had they made all these preparationsthen?” To make room for the visitors the children had not even been laidfor at the table; but the two little ones were sitting on a bench in thefurthest corner with their dinner laid on a box, while Polenka as a biggirl had to look after them, feed them, and keep their noses wiped likewell-bred children’s.
Katerina Ivanovna, in fact, could hardly help meeting her guests withincreased dignity, and even haughtiness. She stared at some of them withspecial severity, and loftily invited them to take their seats. Rushingto the conclusion that Amalia Ivanovna must be responsible for those whowere absent, she began treating her with extreme nonchalance, which thelatter promptly observed and resented. Such a beginning was no good omenfor the end. All were seated at last.
Raskolnikov came in almost at the moment of their return from thecemetery. Katerina Ivanovna was greatly delighted to see him, in thefirst place, because he was the one “educated visitor, and, as everyoneknew, was in two years to take a professorship in the university,” andsecondly because he immediately and respectfully apologised for havingbeen unable to be at the funeral. She positively pounced upon him, andmade him sit on her left hand (Amalia Ivanovna was on her right). Inspite of her continual anxiety that the dishes should be passed roundcorrectly and that everyone should taste them, in spite of the agonisingcough which interrupted her every minute and seemed to have grown worseduring the last few days, she hastened to pour out in a half whisper toRaskolnikov all her suppressed feelings and her just indignation atthe failure of the dinner, interspersing her remarks with lively anduncontrollable laughter at the expense of her visitors and especially ofher landlady.
“It’s all that cuckoo’s fault! You know whom I mean? Her, her!” KaterinaIvanovna nodded towards the landlady. “Look at her, she’s making roundeyes, she feels that we are talking about her and can’t understand.Pfoo, the owl! Ha-ha! (Cough-cough-cough.) And what does she put on thatcap for? (Cough-cough-cough.) Have you noticed that she wants everyoneto consider that she is patronising me and doing me an honour by beinghere? I asked her like a sensible woman to invite people, especiallythose who knew my late husband, and look at the set of fools she hasbrought! The sweeps! Look at that one with the spotty face. And thosewretched Poles, ha-ha-ha! (Cough-cough-cough.) Not one of them has everpoked his nose in here, I’ve never set eyes on them. What have they comehere for, I ask you? There they sit in a row. Hey, _pan_!” she criedsuddenly to one of them, “have you tasted the pancakes? Take some more!Have some beer! Won’t you have some vodka? Look, he’s jumped up and ismaking his bows, they must be quite starved, poor things. Never mind,let them eat! They don’t make a noise, anyway, though I’m really afraidfor our landlady’s silver spoons... Amalia Ivanovna!” she addressed hersuddenly, almost aloud, “if your spoons should happen to be stolen,I won’t be responsible, I warn you! Ha-ha-ha!” She laughed turning toRaskolnikov, and again nodding towards the landlady, in high glee at hersally. “She didn’t understand, she didn’t understand again! Look howshe sits with her mouth open! An owl, a real owl! An owl in new ribbons,ha-ha-ha!”
Here her laugh turned again to an insufferable fit of coughing thatlasted five minutes. Drops of perspiration stood out on her foreheadand her handkerchief was stained with blood. She showed Raskolnikovthe blood in silence, and as soon as she could get her breath beganwhispering to him again with extreme animation and a hectic flush on hercheeks.
“Do you know, I gave her the most delicate instructions, so to speak,for inviting that lady and her daughter, you understand of whom I amspeaking? It needed the utmost delicacy, the greatest nicety, but shehas managed things so that that fool, that conceited baggage, thatprovincial nonentity, simply because she is the widow of a major, andhas come to try and get a pension and to fray out her skirts in thegovernment offices, because at fifty she paints her face (everybodyknows it)... a creature like that did not think fit to come, and hasnot even answered the invitation, which the most ordinary good mannersrequired! I can’t understand why Pyotr Petrovitch has not come? Butwhere’s Sonia? Where has she gone? Ah, there she is at last! what is it,Sonia, where have you been? It’s odd that even at your father’s funeralyou should be so unpunctual. Rodion Romanovitch, make room for herbeside you. That’s your place, Sonia... take what you like. Have some ofthe cold entrée with jelly, that’s the best. They’ll bring the pancakesdirectly. Have they given the children some? Polenka, have you goteverything? (Cough-cough-cough.) That’s all right. Be a good girl, Lida,and, Kolya, don’t fidget with your feet; sit like a little gentleman.What are you saying, Sonia?”
Sonia hastened to give her Pyotr Petrovitch’s apologies, trying tospeak loud enough for everyone to hear and carefully choosing the mostrespectful phrases which she attributed to Pyotr Petrovitch. She addedthat Pyotr Petrovitch had particularly told her to say that, as soon ashe possibly could, he would come immediately to discuss _business_ alonewith her and to consider what could be done for her, etc., etc.
Sonia knew that this would comfort Katerina Ivanovna, would flatter herand gratify her pride. She sat down beside Raskolnikov; she made him ahurried bow, glancing curiously at him. But for the rest of the timeshe seemed to avoid looking at him or speaking to him. She seemedabsent-minded, though she kept looking at Katerina Ivanovna, tryingto please her. Neither she nor Katerina Ivanovna had been able to getmourning; Sonia was wearing dark brown, and Katerina Ivanovna had on heronly dress, a dark striped cotton one.
The message from Pyotr Petrovitch was very successful. Listening toSonia with dignity, Katerina Ivanovna inquired with equal dignity howPyotr Petrovitch was, then at once whispered almost aloud toRaskolnikov that it certainly would have been strange for a man ofPyotr Petrovitch’s position and standing to find himself in such“extraordinary company,” in spite of his devotion to her family and hisold friendship with her father.
“That’s why I am so grateful to you, Rodion Romanovitch, that you havenot disdained my hospitality, even in such surroundings,” she addedalmost aloud. “But I am sure that it was only your special affection formy poor husband that has made you keep your promise.”
Then once more with pride and dignity she scanned her visitors, andsuddenly inquired aloud across the table of the deaf man: “Wouldn’t hehave some more meat, and had he been given some wine?” The old man madeno answer and for a long while could not understand what he was asked,though his neighbours amused themselves by poking and shaking him. Hesimply gazed about him with his mouth open, which only increased thegeneral mirth.
“What an imbecile! Look, look! Why was he brought? But as to PyotrPetrovitch, I always had confidence in him,” Katerina Ivanovnacontinued, “and, of course, he is not like...” with an extremely sternface she addressed Amalia Ivanovna so sharply and loudly that the latterwas quite disconcerted, “not like your dressed up draggletails whommy father would not have taken as cooks into his kitchen, and my latehusband would have done them honour if he had invited them in thegoodness of his heart.”
“Yes, he was fond of drink, he was fond of it, he did drink!” cried thecommissariat clerk, gulping down his twelfth glass of vodka.
“My late husband certainly had that weakness, and everyone knowsit,” Katerina Ivanovna attacked him at once, “but he was a kind andhonourable man, who loved and respected his family. The worst of it washis good nature made him trust all sorts of disreputable people, and hedrank with fellows who were not worth the sole of his shoe. Would youbelieve it, Rodion Romanovitch, they found a gingerbread cock in hispocket; he was dead drunk, but he did not forget the children!”
“A cock? Did you say a cock?” shouted the commissariat clerk.
Katerina Ivanovna did not vouchsafe a reply. She sighed, lost inthought.
“No doubt you think, like everyone, that I was too severe with him,” shewent on, addressing Raskolnikov. “But that’s not so! He respected me, herespected me very much! He was a kind-hearted man! And how sorry I wasfor him sometimes! He would sit in a corner and look at me, I used tofeel so sorry for him, I used to want to be kind to him and then wouldthink to myself: ‘Be kind to him and he will drink again,’ it was onlyby severity that you could keep him within bounds.”
“Yes, he used to get his hair pulled pretty often,” roared thecommissariat clerk again, swallowing another glass of vodka.
“Some fools would be the better for a good drubbing, as well as havingtheir hair pulled. I am not talking of my late husband now!” KaterinaIvanovna snapped at him.
The flush on her cheeks grew more and more marked, her chest heaved. Inanother minute she would have been ready to make a scene. Many of thevisitors were sniggering, evidently delighted. They began poking thecommissariat clerk and whispering something to him. They were evidentlytrying to egg him on.
“Allow me to ask what are you alluding to,” began the clerk, “that isto say, whose... about whom... did you say just now... But I don’t care!That’s nonsense! Widow! I forgive you.... Pass!”
And he took another drink of vodka.
Raskolnikov sat in silence, listening with disgust. He only ate frompoliteness, just tasting the food that Katerina Ivanovna was continuallyputting on his plate, to avoid hurting her feelings. He watched Soniaintently. But Sonia became more and more anxious and distressed; she,too, foresaw that the dinner would not end peaceably, and saw withterror Katerina Ivanovna’s growing irritation. She knew that she, Sonia,was the chief reason for the ‘genteel’ ladies’ contemptuous treatment ofKaterina Ivanovna’s invitation. She had heard from Amalia Ivanovna thatthe mother was positively offended at the invitation and had asked thequestion: “How could she let her daughter sit down beside _that youngperson_?” Sonia had a feeling that Katerina Ivanovna had already heardthis and an insult to Sonia meant more to Katerina Ivanovna than aninsult to herself, her children, or her father, Sonia knew thatKaterina Ivanovna would not be satisfied now, “till she had shown thosedraggletails that they were both...” To make matters worse someonepassed Sonia, from the other end of the table, a plate with two heartspierced with an arrow, cut out of black bread. Katerina Ivanovna flushedcrimson and at once said aloud across the table that the man who sent itwas “a drunken ass!”
Amalia Ivanovna was foreseeing something amiss, and at the same timedeeply wounded by Katerina Ivanovna’s haughtiness, and to restore thegood-humour of the company and raise herself in their esteem she began,apropos of nothing, telling a story about an acquaintance of hers “Karlfrom the chemist’s,” who was driving one night in a cab, and that “thecabman wanted him to kill, and Karl very much begged him not to kill,and wept and clasped hands, and frightened and from fear pierced hisheart.” Though Katerina Ivanovna smiled, she observed at once thatAmalia Ivanovna ought not to tell anecdotes in Russian; the latter wasstill more offended, and she retorted that her “_Vater aus Berlin_ was avery important man, and always went with his hands in pockets.” KaterinaIvanovna could not restrain herself and laughed so much that AmaliaIvanovna lost patience and could scarcely control herself.
“Listen to the owl!” Katerina Ivanovna whispered at once, hergood-humour almost restored, “she meant to say he kept his hands inhis pockets, but she said he put his hands in people’s pockets.(Cough-cough.) And have you noticed, Rodion Romanovitch, that all thesePetersburg foreigners, the Germans especially, are all stupider thanwe! Can you fancy anyone of us telling how ‘Karl from the chemist’s’‘pierced his heart from fear’ and that the idiot, instead of punishingthe cabman, ‘clasped his hands and wept, and much begged.’ Ah, the fool!And you know she fancies it’s very touching and does not suspect howstupid she is! To my thinking that drunken commissariat clerk is a greatdeal cleverer, anyway one can see that he has addled his brains withdrink, but you know, these foreigners are always so well behavedand serious.... Look how she sits glaring! She is angry, ha-ha!(Cough-cough-cough.)”
Regaining her good-humour, Katerina Ivanovna began at once tellingRaskolnikov that when she had obtained her pension, she intended to opena school for the daughters of gentlemen in her native town T----.This was the first time she had spoken to him of the project, and shelaunched out into the most alluring details. It suddenly appeared thatKaterina Ivanovna had in her hands the very certificate of honour ofwhich Marmeladov had spoken to Raskolnikov in the tavern, when he toldhim that Katerina Ivanovna, his wife, had danced the shawl dancebefore the governor and other great personages on leaving school. Thiscertificate of honour was obviously intended now to prove KaterinaIvanovna’s right to open a boarding-school; but she had armed herselfwith it chiefly with the object of overwhelming “those two stuck-updraggletails” if they came to the dinner, and proving incontestablythat Katerina Ivanovna was of the most noble, “she might even sayaristocratic family, a colonel’s daughter and was far superior tocertain adventuresses who have been so much to the fore of late.” Thecertificate of honour immediately passed into the hands of the drunkenguests, and Katerina Ivanovna did not try to retain it, for it actuallycontained the statement _en toutes lettres_, that her father was of therank of a major, and also a companion of an order, so that she reallywas almost the daughter of a colonel.
Warming up, Katerina Ivanovna proceeded to enlarge on the peaceful andhappy life they would lead in T----, on the gymnasium teachers whomshe would engage to give lessons in her boarding-school, one a mostrespectable old Frenchman, one Mangot, who had taught Katerina Ivanovnaherself in old days and was still living in T----, and would no doubtteach in her school on moderate terms. Next she spoke of Sonia who wouldgo with her to T---- and help her in all her plans. At this someone atthe further end of the table gave a sudden guffaw.
Though Katerina Ivanovna tried to appear to be disdainfully unaware ofit, she raised her voice and began at once speaking with conviction ofSonia’s undoubted ability to assist her, of “her gentleness, patience,devotion, generosity and good education,” tapping Sonia on the cheek andkissing her warmly twice. Sonia flushed crimson, and Katerina Ivanovnasuddenly burst into tears, immediately observing that she was “nervousand silly, that she was too much upset, that it was time to finish, andas the dinner was over, it was time to hand round the tea.”
At that moment, Amalia Ivanovna, deeply aggrieved at taking no part inthe conversation, and not being listened to, made one last effort,and with secret misgivings ventured on an exceedingly deep and weightyobservation, that “in the future boarding-school she would have to payparticular attention to _die Wäsche_, and that there certainly must be agood _dame_ to look after the linen, and secondly that the young ladiesmust not novels at night read.”
Katerina Ivanovna, who certainly was upset and very tired, as well asheartily sick of the dinner, at once cut short Amalia Ivanovna, saying“she knew nothing about it and was talking nonsense, that it was thebusiness of the laundry maid, and not of the directress of a high-classboarding-school to look after _die Wäsche_, and as for novel-reading,that was simply rudeness, and she begged her to be silent.” AmaliaIvanovna fired up and getting angry observed that she only “meant hergood,” and that “she had meant her very good,” and that “it was longsince she had paid her _gold_ for the lodgings.”
Katerina Ivanovna at once “set her down,” saying that it was a lie tosay she wished her good, because only yesterday when her dead husbandwas lying on the table, she had worried her about the lodgings. To thisAmalia Ivanovna very appropriately observed that she had invited thoseladies, but “those ladies had not come, because those ladies _are_ladies and cannot come to a lady who is not a lady.” Katerina Ivanovnaat once pointed out to her, that as she was a slut she could not judgewhat made one really a lady. Amalia Ivanovna at once declared that her“_Vater aus Berlin_ was a very, very important man, and both hands inpockets went, and always used to say: ‘Poof! poof!’” and she leaptup from the table to represent her father, sticking her hands in herpockets, puffing her cheeks, and uttering vague sounds resembling “poof!poof!” amid loud laughter from all the lodgers, who purposely encouragedAmalia Ivanovna, hoping for a fight.
But this was too much for Katerina Ivanovna, and she at once declared,so that all could hear, that Amalia Ivanovna probably never had afather, but was simply a drunken Petersburg Finn, and had certainly oncebeen a cook and probably something worse. Amalia Ivanovna turned as redas a lobster and squealed that perhaps Katerina Ivanovna never had afather, “but she had a _Vater aus Berlin_ and that he wore a long coatand always said poof-poof-poof!”
Katerina Ivanovna observed contemptuously that all knew what her familywas and that on that very certificate of honour it was stated in printthat her father was a colonel, while Amalia Ivanovna’s father--if shereally had one--was probably some Finnish milkman, but that probably shenever had a father at all, since it was still uncertain whether her namewas Amalia Ivanovna or Amalia Ludwigovna.
At this Amalia Ivanovna, lashed to fury, struck the table with her fist,and shrieked that she was Amalia Ivanovna, and not Ludwigovna, “thather _Vater_ was named Johann and that he was a burgomeister, and thatKaterina Ivanovna’s _Vater_ was quite never a burgomeister.” KaterinaIvanovna rose from her chair, and with a stern and apparently calm voice(though she was pale and her chest was heaving) observed that “if shedared for one moment to set her contemptible wretch of a father on alevel with her papa, she, Katerina Ivanovna, would tear her cap off herhead and trample it under foot.” Amalia Ivanovna ran about the room,shouting at the top of her voice, that she was mistress of the house andthat Katerina Ivanovna should leave the lodgings that minute; then sherushed for some reason to collect the silver spoons from the table.There was a great outcry and uproar, the children began crying. Soniaran to restrain Katerina Ivanovna, but when Amalia Ivanovna shoutedsomething about “the yellow ticket,” Katerina Ivanovna pushed Soniaaway, and rushed at the landlady to carry out her threat.
At that minute the door opened, and Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin appearedon the threshold. He stood scanning the party with severe and vigilanteyes. Katerina Ivanovna rushed to him.
CHAPTER III
“Pyotr Petrovitch,” she cried, “protect me... you at least! Make thisfoolish woman understand that she can’t behave like this to a lady inmisfortune... that there is a law for such things.... I’ll go to thegovernor-general himself.... She shall answer for it.... Remembering myfather’s hospitality protect these orphans.”
“Allow me, madam.... Allow me.” Pyotr Petrovitch waved her off. “Yourpapa as you are well aware I had not the honour of knowing” (someonelaughed aloud) “and I do not intend to take part in your everlastingsquabbles with Amalia Ivanovna.... I have come here to speak of my ownaffairs... and I want to have a word with your stepdaughter, Sofya...Ivanovna, I think it is? Allow me to pass.”
Pyotr Petrovitch, edging by her, went to the opposite corner where Soniawas.
Katerina Ivanovna remained standing where she was, as thoughthunderstruck. She could not understand how Pyotr Petrovitch could denyhaving enjoyed her father’s hospitality. Though she had invented itherself, she believed in it firmly by this time. She was struck tooby the businesslike, dry and even contemptuous menacing tone of PyotrPetrovitch. All the clamour gradually died away at his entrance. Notonly was this “serious business man” strikingly incongruous with therest of the party, but it was evident, too, that he had come upon somematter of consequence, that some exceptional cause must have brought himand that therefore something was going to happen. Raskolnikov, standingbeside Sonia, moved aside to let him pass; Pyotr Petrovitch did notseem to notice him. A minute later Lebeziatnikov, too, appeared in thedoorway; he did not come in, but stood still, listening with markedinterest, almost wonder, and seemed for a time perplexed.
“Excuse me for possibly interrupting you, but it’s a matter ofsome importance,” Pyotr Petrovitch observed, addressing the companygenerally. “I am glad indeed to find other persons present. AmaliaIvanovna, I humbly beg you as mistress of the house to pay carefulattention to what I have to say to Sofya Ivanovna. Sofya Ivanovna,”he went on, addressing Sonia, who was very much surprised and alreadyalarmed, “immediately after your visit I found that a hundred-roublenote was missing from my table, in the room of my friend Mr.Lebeziatnikov. If in any way whatever you know and will tell us whereit is now, I assure you on my word of honour and call all present towitness that the matter shall end there. In the opposite case I shall becompelled to have recourse to very serious measures and then... you mustblame yourself.”
Complete silence reigned in the room. Even the crying children werestill. Sonia stood deadly pale, staring at Luzhin and unable to say aword. She seemed not to understand. Some seconds passed.
“Well, how is it to be then?” asked Luzhin, looking intently at her.
“I don’t know.... I know nothing about it,” Sonia articulated faintly atlast.
“No, you know nothing?” Luzhin repeated and again he paused for someseconds. “Think a moment, mademoiselle,” he began severely, but still,as it were, admonishing her. “Reflect, I am prepared to give you timefor consideration. Kindly observe this: if I were not so entirelyconvinced I should not, you may be sure, with my experience venture toaccuse you so directly. Seeing that for such direct accusation beforewitnesses, if false or even mistaken, I should myself in a certain sensebe made responsible, I am aware of that. This morning I changed formy own purposes several five-per-cent securities for the sum ofapproximately three thousand roubles. The account is noted down in mypocket-book. On my return home I proceeded to count the money--as Mr.Lebeziatnikov will bear witness--and after counting two thousand threehundred roubles I put the rest in my pocket-book in my coat pocket.About five hundred roubles remained on the table and among them threenotes of a hundred roubles each. At that moment you entered (at myinvitation)--and all the time you were present you were exceedinglyembarrassed; so that three times you jumped up in the middle of theconversation and tried to make off. Mr. Lebeziatnikov can bear witnessto this. You yourself, mademoiselle, probably will not refuse to confirmmy statement that I invited you through Mr. Lebeziatnikov, solely inorder to discuss with you the hopeless and destitute position of yourrelative, Katerina Ivanovna (whose dinner I was unable to attend),and the advisability of getting up something of the nature of asubscription, lottery or the like, for her benefit. You thanked me andeven shed tears. I describe all this as it took place, primarily torecall it to your mind and secondly to show you that not the slightestdetail has escaped my recollection. Then I took a ten-rouble note fromthe table and handed it to you by way of first instalment on my partfor the benefit of your relative. Mr. Lebeziatnikov saw all this. ThenI accompanied you to the door--you being still in the same state ofembarrassment--after which, being left alone with Mr. Lebeziatnikov Italked to him for ten minutes--then Mr. Lebeziatnikov went out and Ireturned to the table with the money lying on it, intending to countit and to put it aside, as I proposed doing before. To my surprise onehundred-rouble note had disappeared. Kindly consider the position.Mr. Lebeziatnikov I cannot suspect. I am ashamed to allude to sucha supposition. I cannot have made a mistake in my reckoning, for theminute before your entrance I had finished my accounts and found thetotal correct. You will admit that recollecting your embarrassment, youreagerness to get away and the fact that you kept your hands for sometime on the table, and taking into consideration your social positionand the habits associated with it, I was, so to say, with horror andpositively against my will, _compelled_ to entertain a suspicion--acruel, but justifiable suspicion! I will add further and repeat that inspite of my positive conviction, I realise that I run a certain risk inmaking this accusation, but as you see, I could not let it pass. I havetaken action and I will tell you why: solely, madam, solely, owingto your black ingratitude! Why! I invite you for the benefit of yourdestitute relative, I present you with my donation of ten roubles andyou, on the spot, repay me for all that with such an action. It is toobad! You need a lesson. Reflect! Moreover, like a true friend I begyou--and you could have no better friend at this moment--think what youare doing, otherwise I shall be immovable! Well, what do you say?”
“I have taken nothing,” Sonia whispered in terror, “you gave me tenroubles, here it is, take it.”
Sonia pulled her handkerchief out of her pocket, untied a corner of it,took out the ten-rouble note and gave it to Luzhin.
“And the hundred roubles you do not confess to taking?” he insistedreproachfully, not taking the note.
Sonia looked about her. All were looking at her with such awful, stern,ironical, hostile eyes. She looked at Raskolnikov... he stood againstthe wall, with his arms crossed, looking at her with glowing eyes.
“Good God!” broke from Sonia.
“Amalia Ivanovna, we shall have to send word to the police and thereforeI humbly beg you meanwhile to send for the house porter,” Luzhin saidsoftly and even kindly.
“_Gott der Barmherzige_! I knew she was the thief,” cried AmaliaIvanovna, throwing up her hands.
“You knew it?” Luzhin caught her up, “then I suppose you had some reasonbefore this for thinking so. I beg you, worthy Amalia Ivanovna, toremember your words which have been uttered before witnesses.”
There was a buzz of loud conversation on all sides. All were inmovement.
“What!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, suddenly realising the position, andshe rushed at Luzhin. “What! You accuse her of stealing? Sonia? Ah, thewretches, the wretches!”
And running to Sonia she flung her wasted arms round her and held her asin a vise.
“Sonia! how dared you take ten roubles from him? Foolish girl! Give itto me! Give me the ten roubles at once--here!”
And snatching the note from Sonia, Katerina Ivanovna crumpled it up andflung it straight into Luzhin’s face. It hit him in the eye and fellon the ground. Amalia Ivanovna hastened to pick it up. Pyotr Petrovitchlost his temper.
“Hold that mad woman!” he shouted.
At that moment several other persons, besides Lebeziatnikov, appeared inthe doorway, among them the two ladies.
“What! Mad? Am I mad? Idiot!” shrieked Katerina Ivanovna. “You are anidiot yourself, pettifogging lawyer, base man! Sonia, Sonia take hismoney! Sonia a thief! Why, she’d give away her last penny!” and KaterinaIvanovna broke into hysterical laughter. “Did you ever see such anidiot?” she turned from side to side. “And you too?” she suddenly sawthe landlady, “and you too, sausage eater, you declare that she is athief, you trashy Prussian hen’s leg in a crinoline! She hasn’t beenout of this room: she came straight from you, you wretch, and sat downbeside me, everyone saw her. She sat here, by Rodion Romanovitch. Searchher! Since she’s not left the room, the money would have to be on her!Search her, search her! But if you don’t find it, then excuse me, mydear fellow, you’ll answer for it! I’ll go to our Sovereign, to ourSovereign, to our gracious Tsar himself, and throw myself at his feet,to-day, this minute! I am alone in the world! They would let me in! Doyou think they wouldn’t? You’re wrong, I will get in! I will get in!You reckoned on her meekness! You relied upon that! But I am not sosubmissive, let me tell you! You’ve gone too far yourself. Search her,search her!”
And Katerina Ivanovna in a frenzy shook Luzhin and dragged him towardsSonia.
“I am ready, I’ll be responsible... but calm yourself, madam, calmyourself. I see that you are not so submissive!... Well, well, but as tothat...” Luzhin muttered, “that ought to be before the police... thoughindeed there are witnesses enough as it is.... I am ready.... But inany case it’s difficult for a man... on account of her sex.... But withthe help of Amalia Ivanovna... though, of course, it’s not the way to dothings.... How is it to be done?”
“As you will! Let anyone who likes search her!” cried Katerina Ivanovna.“Sonia, turn out your pockets! See! Look, monster, the pocket is empty,here was her handkerchief! Here is the other pocket, look! D’you see,d’you see?”
And Katerina Ivanovna turned--or rather snatched--both pockets insideout. But from the right pocket a piece of paper flew out and describinga parabola in the air fell at Luzhin’s feet. Everyone saw it, severalcried out. Pyotr Petrovitch stooped down, picked up the paper in twofingers, lifted it where all could see it and opened it. It was ahundred-rouble note folded in eight. Pyotr Petrovitch held up the noteshowing it to everyone.
“Thief! Out of my lodging. Police, police!” yelled Amalia Ivanovna.“They must to Siberia be sent! Away!”
Exclamations arose on all sides. Raskolnikov was silent, keeping hiseyes fixed on Sonia, except for an occasional rapid glance at Luzhin.Sonia stood still, as though unconscious. She was hardly able to feelsurprise. Suddenly the colour rushed to her cheeks; she uttered a cryand hid her face in her hands.
“No, it wasn’t I! I didn’t take it! I know nothing about it,” she criedwith a heartrending wail, and she ran to Katerina Ivanovna, who claspedher tightly in her arms, as though she would shelter her from all theworld.
“Sonia! Sonia! I don’t believe it! You see, I don’t believe it!” shecried in the face of the obvious fact, swaying her to and fro in herarms like a baby, kissing her face continually, then snatching at herhands and kissing them, too, “you took it! How stupid these people are!Oh dear! You are fools, fools,” she cried, addressing the whole room,“you don’t know, you don’t know what a heart she has, what a girl sheis! She take it, she? She’d sell her last rag, she’d go barefoot to helpyou if you needed it, that’s what she is! She has the yellow passportbecause my children were starving, she sold herself for us! Ah, husband,husband! Do you see? Do you see? What a memorial dinner for you!Merciful heavens! Defend her, why are you all standing still? RodionRomanovitch, why don’t you stand up for her? Do you believe it, too? Youare not worth her little finger, all of you together! Good God! Defendher now, at least!”
The wail of the poor, consumptive, helpless woman seemed to produce agreat effect on her audience. The agonised, wasted, consumptive face,the parched blood-stained lips, the hoarse voice, the tears unrestrainedas a child’s, the trustful, childish and yet despairing prayer for helpwere so piteous that everyone seemed to feel for her. Pyotr Petrovitchat any rate was at once moved to _compassion_.
“Madam, madam, this incident does not reflect upon you!” he criedimpressively, “no one would take upon himself to accuse you of being aninstigator or even an accomplice in it, especially as you have provedher guilt by turning out her pockets, showing that you had no previousidea of it. I am most ready, most ready to show compassion, if poverty,so to speak, drove Sofya Semyonovna to it, but why did you refuse toconfess, mademoiselle? Were you afraid of the disgrace? The first step?You lost your head, perhaps? One can quite understand it.... But howcould you have lowered yourself to such an action? Gentlemen,” headdressed the whole company, “gentlemen! Compassionate and, so to say,commiserating these people, I am ready to overlook it even now in spiteof the personal insult lavished upon me! And may this disgrace be alesson to you for the future,” he said, addressing Sonia, “and I willcarry the matter no further. Enough!”
Pyotr Petrovitch stole a glance at Raskolnikov. Their eyes met, and thefire in Raskolnikov’s seemed ready to reduce him to ashes. MeanwhileKaterina Ivanovna apparently heard nothing. She was kissing and huggingSonia like a madwoman. The children, too, were embracing Sonia onall sides, and Polenka--though she did not fully understand what waswrong--was drowned in tears and shaking with sobs, as she hid her prettylittle face, swollen with weeping, on Sonia’s shoulder.
“How vile!” a loud voice cried suddenly in the doorway.
Pyotr Petrovitch looked round quickly.
“What vileness!” Lebeziatnikov repeated, staring him straight in theface.
Pyotr Petrovitch gave a positive start--all noticed it and recalled itafterwards. Lebeziatnikov strode into the room.
“And you dared to call me as witness?” he said, going up to PyotrPetrovitch.
“What do you mean? What are you talking about?” muttered Luzhin.
“I mean that you... are a slanderer, that’s what my words mean!”Lebeziatnikov said hotly, looking sternly at him with his short-sightedeyes.
He was extremely angry. Raskolnikov gazed intently at him, as thoughseizing and weighing each word. Again there was a silence. PyotrPetrovitch indeed seemed almost dumbfounded for the first moment.
“If you mean that for me,...” he began, stammering. “But what’s thematter with you? Are you out of your mind?”
“I’m in my mind, but you are a scoundrel! Ah, how vile! I have heardeverything. I kept waiting on purpose to understand it, for I must owneven now it is not quite logical.... What you have done it all for Ican’t understand.”
“Why, what have I done then? Give over talking in your nonsensicalriddles! Or maybe you are drunk!”
“You may be a drunkard, perhaps, vile man, but I am not! I never touchvodka, for it’s against my convictions. Would you believe it, he, hehimself, with his own hands gave Sofya Semyonovna that hundred-roublenote--I saw it, I was a witness, I’ll take my oath! He did it, he!”repeated Lebeziatnikov, addressing all.
“Are you crazy, milksop?” squealed Luzhin. “She is herself beforeyou--she herself here declared just now before everyone that I gave heronly ten roubles. How could I have given it to her?”
“I saw it, I saw it,” Lebeziatnikov repeated, “and though it is againstmy principles, I am ready this very minute to take any oath you likebefore the court, for I saw how you slipped it in her pocket. Onlylike a fool I thought you did it out of kindness! When you were sayinggood-bye to her at the door, while you held her hand in one hand, withthe other, the left, you slipped the note into her pocket. I saw it, Isaw it!”
Luzhin turned pale.
“What lies!” he cried impudently, “why, how could you, standing by thewindow, see the note? You fancied it with your short-sighted eyes. Youare raving!”
“No, I didn’t fancy it. And though I was standing some way off, I sawit all. And though it certainly would be hard to distinguish a note fromthe window--that’s true--I knew for certain that it was a hundred-roublenote, because, when you were going to give Sofya Semyonovna ten roubles,you took up from the table a hundred-rouble note (I saw it because Iwas standing near then, and an idea struck me at once, so that I did notforget you had it in your hand). You folded it and kept it in your handall the time. I didn’t think of it again until, when you were gettingup, you changed it from your right hand to your left and nearly droppedit! I noticed it because the same idea struck me again, that you meantto do her a kindness without my seeing. You can fancy how I watched youand I saw how you succeeded in slipping it into her pocket. I saw it, Isaw it, I’ll take my oath.”
Lebeziatnikov was almost breathless. Exclamations arose on all handschiefly expressive of wonder, but some were menacing in tone. They allcrowded round Pyotr Petrovitch. Katerina Ivanovna flew to Lebeziatnikov.
“I was mistaken in you! Protect her! You are the only one to take herpart! She is an orphan. God has sent you!”
Katerina Ivanovna, hardly knowing what she was doing, sank on her kneesbefore him.
“A pack of nonsense!” yelled Luzhin, roused to fury, “it’s all nonsenseyou’ve been talking! ‘An idea struck you, you didn’t think, younoticed’--what does it amount to? So I gave it to her on the sly onpurpose? What for? With what object? What have I to do with this...?”
“What for? That’s what I can’t understand, but that what I am tellingyou is the fact, that’s certain! So far from my being mistaken, youinfamous criminal man, I remember how, on account of it, a questionoccurred to me at once, just when I was thanking you and pressingyour hand. What made you put it secretly in her pocket? Why you did itsecretly, I mean? Could it be simply to conceal it from me, knowing thatmy convictions are opposed to yours and that I do not approve of privatebenevolence, which effects no radical cure? Well, I decided that youreally were ashamed of giving such a large sum before me. Perhaps,too, I thought, he wants to give her a surprise, when she finds a wholehundred-rouble note in her pocket. (For I know, some benevolent peopleare very fond of decking out their charitable actions in that way.) Thenthe idea struck me, too, that you wanted to test her, to see whether,when she found it, she would come to thank you. Then, too, that youwanted to avoid thanks and that, as the saying is, your right handshould not know... something of that sort, in fact. I thought of somany possibilities that I put off considering it, but still thought itindelicate to show you that I knew your secret. But another idea struckme again that Sofya Semyonovna might easily lose the money before shenoticed it, that was why I decided to come in here to call her out ofthe room and to tell her that you put a hundred roubles in her pocket.But on my way I went first to Madame Kobilatnikov’s to take them the‘General Treatise on the Positive Method’ and especially to recommendPiderit’s article (and also Wagner’s); then I come on here and what astate of things I find! Now could I, could I, have all these ideas andreflections if I had not seen you put the hundred-rouble note in herpocket?”
When Lebeziatnikov finished his long-winded harangue with the logicaldeduction at the end, he was quite tired, and the perspiration streamedfrom his face. He could not, alas, even express himself correctlyin Russian, though he knew no other language, so that he was quiteexhausted, almost emaciated after this heroic exploit. But his speechproduced a powerful effect. He had spoken with such vehemence, with suchconviction that everyone obviously believed him. Pyotr Petrovitch feltthat things were going badly with him.
“What is it to do with me if silly ideas did occur to you?” he shouted,“that’s no evidence. You may have dreamt it, that’s all! And I tell you,you are lying, sir. You are lying and slandering from some spite againstme, simply from pique, because I did not agree with your free-thinking,godless, social propositions!”
But this retort did not benefit Pyotr Petrovitch. Murmurs of disapprovalwere heard on all sides.
“Ah, that’s your line now, is it!” cried Lebeziatnikov, “that’snonsense! Call the police and I’ll take my oath! There’s only one thingI can’t understand: what made him risk such a contemptible action. Oh,pitiful, despicable man!”
“I can explain why he risked such an action, and if necessary, I, too,will swear to it,” Raskolnikov said at last in a firm voice, and hestepped forward.
He appeared to be firm and composed. Everyone felt clearly, from thevery look of him that he really knew about it and that the mystery wouldbe solved.
“Now I can explain it all to myself,” said Raskolnikov, addressingLebeziatnikov. “From the very beginning of the business, I suspectedthat there was some scoundrelly intrigue at the bottom of it. I beganto suspect it from some special circumstances known to me only, whichI will explain at once to everyone: they account for everything. Yourvaluable evidence has finally made everything clear to me. I beg all,all to listen. This gentleman (he pointed to Luzhin) was recentlyengaged to be married to a young lady--my sister, Avdotya RomanovnaRaskolnikov. But coming to Petersburg he quarrelled with me, the daybefore yesterday, at our first meeting and I drove him out of my room--Ihave two witnesses to prove it. He is a very spiteful man.... The daybefore yesterday I did not know that he was staying here, in your room,and that consequently on the very day we quarrelled--the day beforeyesterday--he saw me give Katerina Ivanovna some money for the funeral,as a friend of the late Mr. Marmeladov. He at once wrote a note tomy mother and informed her that I had given away all my money, notto Katerina Ivanovna but to Sofya Semyonovna, and referred in a mostcontemptible way to the... character of Sofya Semyonovna, that is,hinted at the character of my attitude to Sofya Semyonovna. All this youunderstand was with the object of dividing me from my mother and sister,by insinuating that I was squandering on unworthy objects the moneywhich they had sent me and which was all they had. Yesterday evening,before my mother and sister and in his presence, I declared that I hadgiven the money to Katerina Ivanovna for the funeral and not to SofyaSemyonovna and that I had no acquaintance with Sofya Semyonovna and hadnever seen her before, indeed. At the same time I added that he,Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin, with all his virtues, was not worth SofyaSemyonovna’s little finger, though he spoke so ill of her. To hisquestion--would I let Sofya Semyonovna sit down beside my sister, Ianswered that I had already done so that day. Irritated that my motherand sister were unwilling to quarrel with me at his insinuations, hegradually began being unpardonably rude to them. A final rupture tookplace and he was turned out of the house. All this happened yesterdayevening. Now I beg your special attention: consider: if he had nowsucceeded in proving that Sofya Semyonovna was a thief, he wouldhave shown to my mother and sister that he was almost right in hissuspicions, that he had reason to be angry at my putting my sister ona level with Sofya Semyonovna, that, in attacking me, he was protectingand preserving the honour of my sister, his betrothed. In fact he mighteven, through all this, have been able to estrange me from my family,and no doubt he hoped to be restored to favour with them; to say nothingof revenging himself on me personally, for he has grounds for supposingthat the honour and happiness of Sofya Semyonovna are very precious tome. That was what he was working for! That’s how I understand it. That’sthe whole reason for it and there can be no other!”
It was like this, or somewhat like this, that Raskolnikov wound up hisspeech which was followed very attentively, though often interrupted byexclamations from his audience. But in spite of interruptions he spokeclearly, calmly, exactly, firmly. His decisive voice, his tone ofconviction and his stern face made a great impression on everyone.
“Yes, yes, that’s it,” Lebeziatnikov assented gleefully, “that must beit, for he asked me, as soon as Sofya Semyonovna came into our room,whether you were here, whether I had seen you among Katerina Ivanovna’sguests. He called me aside to the window and asked me in secret. It wasessential for him that you should be here! That’s it, that’s it!”
Luzhin smiled contemptuously and did not speak. But he was very pale. Heseemed to be deliberating on some means of escape. Perhaps he would havebeen glad to give up everything and get away, but at the moment thiswas scarcely possible. It would have implied admitting the truth ofthe accusations brought against him. Moreover, the company, which hadalready been excited by drink, was now too much stirred to allow it. Thecommissariat clerk, though indeed he had not grasped the whole position,was shouting louder than anyone and was making some suggestions veryunpleasant to Luzhin. But not all those present were drunk; lodgers camein from all the rooms. The three Poles were tremendously excitedand were continually shouting at him: “The _pan_ is a _lajdak_!” andmuttering threats in Polish. Sonia had been listening with strainedattention, though she too seemed unable to grasp it all; she seemed asthough she had just returned to consciousness. She did not take hereyes off Raskolnikov, feeling that all her safety lay in him. KaterinaIvanovna breathed hard and painfully and seemed fearfully exhausted.Amalia Ivanovna stood looking more stupid than anyone, with her mouthwide open, unable to make out what had happened. She only saw that PyotrPetrovitch had somehow come to grief.
Raskolnikov was attempting to speak again, but they did not let him.Everyone was crowding round Luzhin with threats and shouts of abuse.But Pyotr Petrovitch was not intimidated. Seeing that his accusation ofSonia had completely failed, he had recourse to insolence:
“Allow me, gentlemen, allow me! Don’t squeeze, let me pass!” he said,making his way through the crowd. “And no threats, if you please! Iassure you it will be useless, you will gain nothing by it. On thecontrary, you’ll have to answer, gentlemen, for violently obstructingthe course of justice. The thief has been more than unmasked, and Ishall prosecute. Our judges are not so blind and... not so drunk, andwill not believe the testimony of two notorious infidels, agitators, andatheists, who accuse me from motives of personal revenge which they arefoolish enough to admit.... Yes, allow me to pass!”
“Don’t let me find a trace of you in my room! Kindly leave at once, andeverything is at an end between us! When I think of the trouble I’vebeen taking, the way I’ve been expounding... all this fortnight!”
“I told you myself to-day that I was going, when you tried to keep me;now I will simply add that you are a fool. I advise you to see a doctorfor your brains and your short sight. Let me pass, gentlemen!”
He forced his way through. But the commissariat clerk was unwilling tolet him off so easily: he picked up a glass from the table, brandishedit in the air and flung it at Pyotr Petrovitch; but the glass flewstraight at Amalia Ivanovna. She screamed, and the clerk, overbalancing,fell heavily under the table. Pyotr Petrovitch made his way to his roomand half an hour later had left the house. Sonia, timid by nature, hadfelt before that day that she could be ill-treated more easily thananyone, and that she could be wronged with impunity. Yet till thatmoment she had fancied that she might escape misfortune by care,gentleness and submissiveness before everyone. Her disappointment wastoo great. She could, of course, bear with patience and almost withoutmurmur anything, even this. But for the first minute she felt it toobitter. In spite of her triumph and her justification--when her firstterror and stupefaction had passed and she could understand it allclearly--the feeling of her helplessness and of the wrong done to hermade her heart throb with anguish and she was overcome with hystericalweeping. At last, unable to bear any more, she rushed out of the roomand ran home, almost immediately after Luzhin’s departure. When amidstloud laughter the glass flew at Amalia Ivanovna, it was more than thelandlady could endure. With a shriek she rushed like a fury at KaterinaIvanovna, considering her to blame for everything.
“Out of my lodgings! At once! Quick march!”
And with these words she began snatching up everything she could layher hands on that belonged to Katerina Ivanovna, and throwing it on thefloor. Katerina Ivanovna, pale, almost fainting, and gasping for breath,jumped up from the bed where she had sunk in exhaustion and darted atAmalia Ivanovna. But the battle was too unequal: the landlady waved heraway like a feather.
“What! As though that godless calumny was not enough--this vile creatureattacks me! What! On the day of my husband’s funeral I am turned out ofmy lodging! After eating my bread and salt she turns me into the street,with my orphans! Where am I to go?” wailed the poor woman, sobbing andgasping. “Good God!” she cried with flashing eyes, “is there no justiceupon earth? Whom should you protect if not us orphans? We shall see!There is law and justice on earth, there is, I will find it! Wait a bit,godless creature! Polenka, stay with the children, I’ll come back. Waitfor me, if you have to wait in the street. We will see whether there isjustice on earth!”
And throwing over her head that green shawl which Marmeladov hadmentioned to Raskolnikov, Katerina Ivanovna squeezed her way through thedisorderly and drunken crowd of lodgers who still filled the room, and,wailing and tearful, she ran into the street--with a vague intentionof going at once somewhere to find justice. Polenka with the two littleones in her arms crouched, terrified, on the trunk in the corner of theroom, where she waited trembling for her mother to come back. AmaliaIvanovna raged about the room, shrieking, lamenting and throwingeverything she came across on the floor. The lodgers talkedincoherently, some commented to the best of their ability on what hadhappened, others quarrelled and swore at one another, while othersstruck up a song....
“Now it’s time for me to go,” thought Raskolnikov. “Well, SofyaSemyonovna, we shall see what you’ll say now!”
And he set off in the direction of Sonia’s lodgings.
CHAPTER IV
Raskolnikov had been a vigorous and active champion of Sonia againstLuzhin, although he had such a load of horror and anguish in his ownheart. But having gone through so much in the morning, he found a sortof relief in a change of sensations, apart from the strong personalfeeling which impelled him to defend Sonia. He was agitated too,especially at some moments, by the thought of his approaching interviewwith Sonia: he _had_ to tell her who had killed Lizaveta. He knew theterrible suffering it would be to him and, as it were, brushed away thethought of it. So when he cried as he left Katerina Ivanovna’s, “Well,Sofya Semyonovna, we shall see what you’ll say now!” he was stillsuperficially excited, still vigorous and defiant from his triumph overLuzhin. But, strange to say, by the time he reached Sonia’s lodging, hefelt a sudden impotence and fear. He stood still in hesitation at thedoor, asking himself the strange question: “Must he tell her who killedLizaveta?” It was a strange question because he felt at the very timenot only that he could not help telling her, but also that he couldnot put off the telling. He did not yet know why it must be so, heonly _felt_ it, and the agonising sense of his impotence beforethe inevitable almost crushed him. To cut short his hesitation andsuffering, he quickly opened the door and looked at Sonia from thedoorway. She was sitting with her elbows on the table and her face inher hands, but seeing Raskolnikov she got up at once and came to meethim as though she were expecting him.
“What would have become of me but for you?” she said quickly, meetinghim in the middle of the room.
Evidently she was in haste to say this to him. It was what she had beenwaiting for.
Raskolnikov went to the table and sat down on the chair from which shehad only just risen. She stood facing him, two steps away, just as shehad done the day before.
“Well, Sonia?” he said, and felt that his voice was trembling, “it wasall due to ‘your social position and the habits associated with it.’ Didyou understand that just now?”
Her face showed her distress.
“Only don’t talk to me as you did yesterday,” she interrupted him.“Please don’t begin it. There is misery enough without that.”
She made haste to smile, afraid that he might not like the reproach.
“I was silly to come away from there. What is happening there now? Iwanted to go back directly, but I kept thinking that... you would come.”
He told her that Amalia Ivanovna was turning them out of their lodgingand that Katerina Ivanovna had run off somewhere “to seek justice.”
“My God!” cried Sonia, “let’s go at once....”
And she snatched up her cape.
“It’s everlastingly the same thing!” said Raskolnikov, irritably.“You’ve no thought except for them! Stay a little with me.”
“But... Katerina Ivanovna?”
“You won’t lose Katerina Ivanovna, you may be sure, she’ll come to youherself since she has run out,” he added peevishly. “If she doesn’t findyou here, you’ll be blamed for it....”
Sonia sat down in painful suspense. Raskolnikov was silent, gazing atthe floor and deliberating.
“This time Luzhin did not want to prosecute you,” he began, not lookingat Sonia, “but if he had wanted to, if it had suited his plans, he wouldhave sent you to prison if it had not been for Lebeziatnikov and me.Ah?”
“Yes,” she assented in a faint voice. “Yes,” she repeated, preoccupiedand distressed.
“But I might easily not have been there. And it was quite an accidentLebeziatnikov’s turning up.”
Sonia was silent.
“And if you’d gone to prison, what then? Do you remember what I saidyesterday?”
Again she did not answer. He waited.
“I thought you would cry out again ‘don’t speak of it, leave off.’”Raskolnikov gave a laugh, but rather a forced one. “What, silenceagain?” he asked a minute later. “We must talk about something, youknow. It would be interesting for me to know how you would decide acertain ‘problem’ as Lebeziatnikov would say.” (He was beginning to losethe thread.) “No, really, I am serious. Imagine, Sonia, that you hadknown all Luzhin’s intentions beforehand. Known, that is, for a fact,that they would be the ruin of Katerina Ivanovna and the children andyourself thrown in--since you don’t count yourself for anything--Polenkatoo... for she’ll go the same way. Well, if suddenly it all depended onyour decision whether he or they should go on living, that is whetherLuzhin should go on living and doing wicked things, or Katerina Ivanovnashould die? How would you decide which of them was to die? I ask you?”
Sonia looked uneasily at him. There was something peculiar in thishesitating question, which seemed approaching something in a roundaboutway.
“I felt that you were going to ask some question like that,” she said,looking inquisitively at him.
“I dare say you did. But how is it to be answered?”
“Why do you ask about what could not happen?” said Sonia reluctantly.
“Then it would be better for Luzhin to go on living and doing wickedthings? You haven’t dared to decide even that!”
“But I can’t know the Divine Providence.... And why do you ask whatcan’t be answered? What’s the use of such foolish questions? How couldit happen that it should depend on my decision--who has made me a judgeto decide who is to live and who is not to live?”
“Oh, if the Divine Providence is to be mixed up in it, there is no doinganything,” Raskolnikov grumbled morosely.
“You’d better say straight out what you want!” Sonia cried in distress.“You are leading up to something again.... Can you have come simply totorture me?”
She could not control herself and began crying bitterly. He looked ather in gloomy misery. Five minutes passed.
“Of course you’re right, Sonia,” he said softly at last. He was suddenlychanged. His tone of assumed arrogance and helpless defiance was gone.Even his voice was suddenly weak. “I told you yesterday that I was notcoming to ask forgiveness and almost the first thing I’ve said is to askforgiveness.... I said that about Luzhin and Providence for my own sake.I was asking forgiveness, Sonia....”
He tried to smile, but there was something helpless and incomplete inhis pale smile. He bowed his head and hid his face in his hands.
And suddenly a strange, surprising sensation of a sort of bitter hatredfor Sonia passed through his heart. As it were wondering and frightenedof this sensation, he raised his head and looked intently at her; but hemet her uneasy and painfully anxious eyes fixed on him; there waslove in them; his hatred vanished like a phantom. It was not the realfeeling; he had taken the one feeling for the other. It only meant that_that_ minute had come.
He hid his face in his hands again and bowed his head. Suddenly heturned pale, got up from his chair, looked at Sonia, and withoututtering a word sat down mechanically on her bed.
His sensations that moment were terribly like the moment when he hadstood over the old woman with the axe in his hand and felt that “he mustnot lose another minute.”
“What’s the matter?” asked Sonia, dreadfully frightened.
He could not utter a word. This was not at all, not at all the way hehad intended to “tell” and he did not understand what was happening tohim now. She went up to him, softly, sat down on the bed beside him andwaited, not taking her eyes off him. Her heart throbbed and sank. Itwas unendurable; he turned his deadly pale face to her. His lips worked,helplessly struggling to utter something. A pang of terror passedthrough Sonia’s heart.
“What’s the matter?” she repeated, drawing a little away from him.
“Nothing, Sonia, don’t be frightened.... It’s nonsense. It really isnonsense, if you think of it,” he muttered, like a man in delirium. “Whyhave I come to torture you?” he added suddenly, looking at her. “Why,really? I keep asking myself that question, Sonia....”
He had perhaps been asking himself that question a quarter of an hourbefore, but now he spoke helplessly, hardly knowing what he said andfeeling a continual tremor all over.
“Oh, how you are suffering!” she muttered in distress, looking intentlyat him.
“It’s all nonsense.... Listen, Sonia.” He suddenly smiled, a palehelpless smile for two seconds. “You remember what I meant to tell youyesterday?”
Sonia waited uneasily.
“I said as I went away that perhaps I was saying good-bye for ever, butthat if I came to-day I would tell you who... who killed Lizaveta.”
She began trembling all over.
“Well, here I’ve come to tell you.”
“Then you really meant it yesterday?” she whispered with difficulty.“How do you know?” she asked quickly, as though suddenly regaining herreason.
Sonia’s face grew paler and paler, and she breathed painfully.
“I know.”
She paused a minute.
“Have they found him?” she asked timidly.
“No.”
“Then how do you know about _it_?” she asked again, hardly audibly andagain after a minute’s pause.
He turned to her and looked very intently at her.
“Guess,” he said, with the same distorted helpless smile.
A shudder passed over her.
“But you... why do you frighten me like this?” she said, smiling like achild.
“I must be a great friend of _his_... since I know,” Raskolnikov wenton, still gazing into her face, as though he could not turn his eyesaway. “He... did not mean to kill that Lizaveta... he... killed heraccidentally.... He meant to kill the old woman when she was alone andhe went there... and then Lizaveta came in... he killed her too.”
Another awful moment passed. Both still gazed at one another.
“You can’t guess, then?” he asked suddenly, feeling as though he wereflinging himself down from a steeple.
“N-no...” whispered Sonia.
“Take a good look.”
As soon as he had said this again, the same familiar sensation froze hisheart. He looked at her and all at once seemed to see in her face theface of Lizaveta. He remembered clearly the expression in Lizaveta’sface, when he approached her with the axe and she stepped back to thewall, putting out her hand, with childish terror in her face, lookingas little children do when they begin to be frightened of something,looking intently and uneasily at what frightens them, shrinking back andholding out their little hands on the point of crying. Almost the samething happened now to Sonia. With the same helplessness and the sameterror, she looked at him for a while and, suddenly putting out her lefthand, pressed her fingers faintly against his breast and slowly began toget up from the bed, moving further from him and keeping her eyes fixedeven more immovably on him. Her terror infected him. The same fearshowed itself on his face. In the same way he stared at her and almostwith the same _childish_ smile.
“Have you guessed?” he whispered at last.
“Good God!” broke in an awful wail from her bosom.
She sank helplessly on the bed with her face in the pillows, but amoment later she got up, moved quickly to him, seized both his handsand, gripping them tight in her thin fingers, began looking into hisface again with the same intent stare. In this last desperate look shetried to look into him and catch some last hope. But there was no hope;there was no doubt remaining; it was all true! Later on, indeed, whenshe recalled that moment, she thought it strange and wondered why shehad seen at once that there was no doubt. She could not have said, forinstance, that she had foreseen something of the sort--and yet now, assoon as he told her, she suddenly fancied that she had really foreseenthis very thing.
“Stop, Sonia, enough! don’t torture me,” he begged her miserably.
It was not at all, not at all like this he had thought of telling her,but this is how it happened.
She jumped up, seeming not to know what she was doing, and, wringing herhands, walked into the middle of the room; but quickly went back and satdown again beside him, her shoulder almost touching his. All of a suddenshe started as though she had been stabbed, uttered a cry and fell onher knees before him, she did not know why.
“What have you done--what have you done to yourself?” she said indespair, and, jumping up, she flung herself on his neck, threw her armsround him, and held him tightly.
Raskolnikov drew back and looked at her with a mournful smile.
“You are a strange girl, Sonia--you kiss me and hug me when I tell youabout that.... You don’t think what you are doing.”
“There is no one--no one in the whole world now so unhappy as you!” shecried in a frenzy, not hearing what he said, and she suddenly broke intoviolent hysterical weeping.
A feeling long unfamiliar to him flooded his heart and softened it atonce. He did not struggle against it. Two tears started into his eyesand hung on his eyelashes.
“Then you won’t leave me, Sonia?” he said, looking at her almost withhope.
“No, no, never, nowhere!” cried Sonia. “I will follow you, I will followyou everywhere. Oh, my God! Oh, how miserable I am!... Why, why didn’t Iknow you before! Why didn’t you come before? Oh, dear!”
“Here I have come.”
“Yes, now! What’s to be done now?... Together, together!” she repeatedas it were unconsciously, and she hugged him again. “I’ll follow you toSiberia!”
He recoiled at this, and the same hostile, almost haughty smile came tohis lips.
“Perhaps I don’t want to go to Siberia yet, Sonia,” he said.
Sonia looked at him quickly.
Again after her first passionate, agonising sympathy for the unhappy manthe terrible idea of the murder overwhelmed her. In his changed tone sheseemed to hear the murderer speaking. She looked at him bewildered. Sheknew nothing as yet, why, how, with what object it had been. Now allthese questions rushed at once into her mind. And again she could notbelieve it: “He, he is a murderer! Could it be true?”
“What’s the meaning of it? Where am I?” she said in completebewilderment, as though still unable to recover herself. “How could you,you, a man like you.... How could you bring yourself to it?... What doesit mean?”
“Oh, well--to plunder. Leave off, Sonia,” he answered wearily, almostwith vexation.
Sonia stood as though struck dumb, but suddenly she cried:
“You were hungry! It was... to help your mother? Yes?”
“No, Sonia, no,” he muttered, turning away and hanging his head. “I wasnot so hungry.... I certainly did want to help my mother, but... that’snot the real thing either.... Don’t torture me, Sonia.”
Sonia clasped her hands.
“Could it, could it all be true? Good God, what a truth! Who couldbelieve it? And how could you give away your last farthing and yetrob and murder! Ah,” she cried suddenly, “that money you gave KaterinaIvanovna... that money.... Can that money...”
“No, Sonia,” he broke in hurriedly, “that money was not it. Don’t worryyourself! That money my mother sent me and it came when I was ill, theday I gave it to you.... Razumihin saw it... he received it for me....That money was mine--my own.”
Sonia listened to him in bewilderment and did her utmost to comprehend.
“And _that_ money.... I don’t even know really whether there was anymoney,” he added softly, as though reflecting. “I took a purse off herneck, made of chamois leather... a purse stuffed full of something...but I didn’t look in it; I suppose I hadn’t time.... And thethings--chains and trinkets--I buried under a stone with the purse nextmorning in a yard off the V---- Prospect. They are all there now....”
Sonia strained every nerve to listen.
“Then why... why, you said you did it to rob, but you took nothing?” sheasked quickly, catching at a straw.
“I don’t know.... I haven’t yet decided whether to take that money ornot,” he said, musing again; and, seeming to wake up with a start, hegave a brief ironical smile. “Ach, what silly stuff I am talking, eh?”
The thought flashed through Sonia’s mind, wasn’t he mad? But shedismissed it at once. “No, it was something else.” She could makenothing of it, nothing.
“Do you know, Sonia,” he said suddenly with conviction, “let me tellyou: if I’d simply killed because I was hungry,” laying stress onevery word and looking enigmatically but sincerely at her, “I shouldbe _happy_ now. You must believe that! What would it matter to you,” hecried a moment later with a sort of despair, “what would it matter toyou if I were to confess that I did wrong? What do you gain by sucha stupid triumph over me? Ah, Sonia, was it for that I’ve come to youto-day?”
Again Sonia tried to say something, but did not speak.
“I asked you to go with me yesterday because you are all I have left.”
“Go where?” asked Sonia timidly.
“Not to steal and not to murder, don’t be anxious,” he smiled bitterly.“We are so different.... And you know, Sonia, it’s only now, only thismoment that I understand _where_ I asked you to go with me yesterday!Yesterday when I said it I did not know where. I asked you for onething, I came to you for one thing--not to leave me. You won’t leave me,Sonia?”
She squeezed his hand.
“And why, why did I tell her? Why did I let her know?” he cried a minutelater in despair, looking with infinite anguish at her. “Here you expectan explanation from me, Sonia; you are sitting and waiting for it, I seethat. But what can I tell you? You won’t understand and will only suffermisery... on my account! Well, you are crying and embracing me again.Why do you do it? Because I couldn’t bear my burden and have come tothrow it on another: you suffer too, and I shall feel better! And canyou love such a mean wretch?”
“But aren’t you suffering, too?” cried Sonia.
Again a wave of the same feeling surged into his heart, and again for aninstant softened it.
“Sonia, I have a bad heart, take note of that. It may explain a greatdeal. I have come because I am bad. There are men who wouldn’t havecome. But I am a coward and... a mean wretch. But... never mind! That’snot the point. I must speak now, but I don’t know how to begin.”
He paused and sank into thought.
“Ach, we are so different,” he cried again, “we are not alike. And why,why did I come? I shall never forgive myself that.”
“No, no, it was a good thing you came,” cried Sonia. “It’s better Ishould know, far better!”
He looked at her with anguish.
“What if it were really that?” he said, as though reaching a conclusion.“Yes, that’s what it was! I wanted to become a Napoleon, that is why Ikilled her.... Do you understand now?”
“N-no,” Sonia whispered naïvely and timidly. “Only speak, speak, I shallunderstand, I shall understand _in myself_!” she kept begging him.
“You’ll understand? Very well, we shall see!” He paused and was for sometime lost in meditation.
“It was like this: I asked myself one day this question--what ifNapoleon, for instance, had happened to be in my place, and if he hadnot had Toulon nor Egypt nor the passage of Mont Blanc to begin hiscareer with, but instead of all those picturesque and monumental things,there had simply been some ridiculous old hag, a pawnbroker, who hadto be murdered too to get money from her trunk (for his career, youunderstand). Well, would he have brought himself to that if there hadbeen no other means? Wouldn’t he have felt a pang at its being so farfrom monumental and... and sinful, too? Well, I must tell you that Iworried myself fearfully over that ‘question’ so that I was awfullyashamed when I guessed at last (all of a sudden, somehow) that it wouldnot have given him the least pang, that it would not even have struckhim that it was not monumental... that he would not have seen that therewas anything in it to pause over, and that, if he had had no other way,he would have strangled her in a minute without thinking about it!Well, I too... left off thinking about it... murdered her, followinghis example. And that’s exactly how it was! Do you think it funny? Yes,Sonia, the funniest thing of all is that perhaps that’s just how itwas.”
Sonia did not think it at all funny.
“You had better tell me straight out... without examples,” she begged,still more timidly and scarcely audibly.
He turned to her, looked sadly at her and took her hands.
“You are right again, Sonia. Of course that’s all nonsense, it’s almostall talk! You see, you know of course that my mother has scarcelyanything, my sister happened to have a good education and was condemnedto drudge as a governess. All their hopes were centered on me. I was astudent, but I couldn’t keep myself at the university and was forcedfor a time to leave it. Even if I had lingered on like that, in tenor twelve years I might (with luck) hope to be some sort of teacher orclerk with a salary of a thousand roubles” (he repeated it as though itwere a lesson) “and by that time my mother would be worn out with griefand anxiety and I could not succeed in keeping her in comfort while mysister... well, my sister might well have fared worse! And it’s a hardthing to pass everything by all one’s life, to turn one’s back uponeverything, to forget one’s mother and decorously accept the insultsinflicted on one’s sister. Why should one? When one has buried them toburden oneself with others--wife and children--and to leave them againwithout a farthing? So I resolved to gain possession of the old woman’smoney and to use it for my first years without worrying my mother,to keep myself at the university and for a little while after leavingit--and to do this all on a broad, thorough scale, so as to build upa completely new career and enter upon a new life of independence....Well... that’s all.... Well, of course in killing the old woman I didwrong.... Well, that’s enough.”
He struggled to the end of his speech in exhaustion and let his headsink.
“Oh, that’s not it, that’s not it,” Sonia cried in distress. “How couldone... no, that’s not right, not right.”
“You see yourself that it’s not right. But I’ve spoken truly, it’s thetruth.”
“As though that could be the truth! Good God!”
“I’ve only killed a louse, Sonia, a useless, loathsome, harmfulcreature.”
“A human being--a louse!”
“I too know it wasn’t a louse,” he answered, looking strangely ather. “But I am talking nonsense, Sonia,” he added. “I’ve been talkingnonsense a long time.... That’s not it, you are right there. There werequite, quite other causes for it! I haven’t talked to anyone for solong, Sonia.... My head aches dreadfully now.”
His eyes shone with feverish brilliance. He was almost delirious; anuneasy smile strayed on his lips. His terrible exhaustion could be seenthrough his excitement. Sonia saw how he was suffering. She toowas growing dizzy. And he talked so strangely; it seemed somehowcomprehensible, but yet... “But how, how! Good God!” And she wrung herhands in despair.
“No, Sonia, that’s not it,” he began again suddenly, raising his head,as though a new and sudden train of thought had struck and as it wereroused him--“that’s not it! Better... imagine--yes, it’s certainlybetter--imagine that I am vain, envious, malicious, base, vindictiveand... well, perhaps with a tendency to insanity. (Let’s have it all outat once! They’ve talked of madness already, I noticed.) I told you justnow I could not keep myself at the university. But do you know thatperhaps I might have done? My mother would have sent me what I neededfor the fees and I could have earned enough for clothes, boots and food,no doubt. Lessons had turned up at half a rouble. Razumihin works! But Iturned sulky and wouldn’t. (Yes, sulkiness, that’s the right word forit!) I sat in my room like a spider. You’ve been in my den, you’ve seenit.... And do you know, Sonia, that low ceilings and tiny rooms crampthe soul and the mind? Ah, how I hated that garret! And yet I wouldn’tgo out of it! I wouldn’t on purpose! I didn’t go out for days together,and I wouldn’t work, I wouldn’t even eat, I just lay there doingnothing. If Nastasya brought me anything, I ate it, if she didn’t, Iwent all day without; I wouldn’t ask, on purpose, from sulkiness! Atnight I had no light, I lay in the dark and I wouldn’t earn money forcandles. I ought to have studied, but I sold my books; and the dust liesan inch thick on the notebooks on my table. I preferred lying still andthinking. And I kept thinking.... And I had dreams all the time, strangedreams of all sorts, no need to describe! Only then I began to fancythat... No, that’s not it! Again I am telling you wrong! You see I keptasking myself then: why am I so stupid that if others are stupid--and Iknow they are--yet I won’t be wiser? Then I saw, Sonia, that if onewaits for everyone to get wiser it will take too long.... Afterwards Iunderstood that that would never come to pass, that men won’t change andthat nobody can alter it and that it’s not worth wasting effort over it.Yes, that’s so. That’s the law of their nature, Sonia,... that’s so!...And I know now, Sonia, that whoever is strong in mind and spirit willhave power over them. Anyone who is greatly daring is right in theireyes. He who despises most things will be a lawgiver among them and hewho dares most of all will be most in the right! So it has been till nowand so it will always be. A man must be blind not to see it!”
Though Raskolnikov looked at Sonia as he said this, he no longer caredwhether she understood or not. The fever had complete hold of him; hewas in a sort of gloomy ecstasy (he certainly had been too long withouttalking to anyone). Sonia felt that his gloomy creed had become hisfaith and code.
“I divined then, Sonia,” he went on eagerly, “that power is onlyvouchsafed to the man who dares to stoop and pick it up. There is onlyone thing, one thing needful: one has only to dare! Then for the firsttime in my life an idea took shape in my mind which no one had everthought of before me, no one! I saw clear as daylight how strange it isthat not a single person living in this mad world has had the daring togo straight for it all and send it flying to the devil! I... I wanted_to have the daring_... and I killed her. I only wanted to have thedaring, Sonia! That was the whole cause of it!”
“Oh hush, hush,” cried Sonia, clasping her hands. “You turned away fromGod and God has smitten you, has given you over to the devil!”
“Then Sonia, when I used to lie there in the dark and all this becameclear to me, was it a temptation of the devil, eh?”
“Hush, don’t laugh, blasphemer! You don’t understand, you don’tunderstand! Oh God! He won’t understand!”
“Hush, Sonia! I am not laughing. I know myself that it was the devilleading me. Hush, Sonia, hush!” he repeated with gloomy insistence. “Iknow it all, I have thought it all over and over and whispered it allover to myself, lying there in the dark.... I’ve argued it all over withmyself, every point of it, and I know it all, all! And how sick, howsick I was then of going over it all! I have kept wanting to forget itand make a new beginning, Sonia, and leave off thinking. And you don’tsuppose that I went into it headlong like a fool? I went into it like awise man, and that was just my destruction. And you mustn’t suppose thatI didn’t know, for instance, that if I began to question myself whetherI had the right to gain power--I certainly hadn’t the right--or that ifI asked myself whether a human being is a louse it proved that it wasn’tso for me, though it might be for a man who would go straight to hisgoal without asking questions.... If I worried myself all those days,wondering whether Napoleon would have done it or not, I felt clearlyof course that I wasn’t Napoleon. I had to endure all the agony of thatbattle of ideas, Sonia, and I longed to throw it off: I wanted to murderwithout casuistry, to murder for my own sake, for myself alone! I didn’twant to lie about it even to myself. It wasn’t to help my mother I didthe murder--that’s nonsense--I didn’t do the murder to gain wealth andpower and to become a benefactor of mankind. Nonsense! I simply did it;I did the murder for myself, for myself alone, and whether I became abenefactor to others, or spent my life like a spider catching men inmy web and sucking the life out of men, I couldn’t have cared at thatmoment.... And it was not the money I wanted, Sonia, when I did it. Itwas not so much the money I wanted, but something else.... I know it allnow.... Understand me! Perhaps I should never have committed a murderagain. I wanted to find out something else; it was something else ledme on. I wanted to find out then and quickly whether I was a louselike everybody else or a man. Whether I can step over barriers ornot, whether I dare stoop to pick up or not, whether I am a tremblingcreature or whether I have the _right_...”
“To kill? Have the right to kill?” Sonia clasped her hands.
“Ach, Sonia!” he cried irritably and seemed about to make some retort,but was contemptuously silent. “Don’t interrupt me, Sonia. I want toprove one thing only, that the devil led me on then and he has shown mesince that I had not the right to take that path, because I am just sucha louse as all the rest. He was mocking me and here I’ve come to younow! Welcome your guest! If I were not a louse, should I have come toyou? Listen: when I went then to the old woman’s I only went to_try_.... You may be sure of that!”
“And you murdered her!”
“But how did I murder her? Is that how men do murders? Do men go tocommit a murder as I went then? I will tell you some day how I went!Did I murder the old woman? I murdered myself, not her! I crushed myselfonce for all, for ever.... But it was the devil that killed that oldwoman, not I. Enough, enough, Sonia, enough! Let me be!” he cried in asudden spasm of agony, “let me be!”
He leaned his elbows on his knees and squeezed his head in his hands asin a vise.
“What suffering!” A wail of anguish broke from Sonia.
“Well, what am I to do now?” he asked, suddenly raising his head andlooking at her with a face hideously distorted by despair.
“What are you to do?” she cried, jumping up, and her eyes that had beenfull of tears suddenly began to shine. “Stand up!” (She seized him bythe shoulder, he got up, looking at her almost bewildered.) “Go at once,this very minute, stand at the cross-roads, bow down, first kiss theearth which you have defiled and then bow down to all the world and sayto all men aloud, ‘I am a murderer!’ Then God will send you life again.Will you go, will you go?” she asked him, trembling all over, snatchinghis two hands, squeezing them tight in hers and gazing at him with eyesfull of fire.
He was amazed at her sudden ecstasy.
“You mean Siberia, Sonia? I must give myself up?” he asked gloomily.
“Suffer and expiate your sin by it, that’s what you must do.”
“No! I am not going to them, Sonia!”
“But how will you go on living? What will you live for?” cried Sonia,“how is it possible now? Why, how can you talk to your mother? (Oh, whatwill become of them now?) But what am I saying? You have abandoned yourmother and your sister already. He has abandoned them already! Oh,God!” she cried, “why, he knows it all himself. How, how can he live byhimself! What will become of you now?”
“Don’t be a child, Sonia,” he said softly. “What wrong have I donethem? Why should I go to them? What should I say to them? That’s only aphantom.... They destroy men by millions themselves and look on it as avirtue. They are knaves and scoundrels, Sonia! I am not going to them.And what should I say to them--that I murdered her, but did not dare totake the money and hid it under a stone?” he added with a bitter smile.“Why, they would laugh at me, and would call me a fool for not gettingit. A coward and a fool! They wouldn’t understand and they don’t deserveto understand. Why should I go to them? I won’t. Don’t be a child,Sonia....”
“It will be too much for you to bear, too much!” she repeated, holdingout her hands in despairing supplication.
“Perhaps I’ve been unfair to myself,” he observed gloomily, pondering,“perhaps after all I am a man and not a louse and I’ve been in too greata hurry to condemn myself. I’ll make another fight for it.”
A haughty smile appeared on his lips.
“What a burden to bear! And your whole life, your whole life!”
“I shall get used to it,” he said grimly and thoughtfully. “Listen,” hebegan a minute later, “stop crying, it’s time to talk of the facts: I’vecome to tell you that the police are after me, on my track....”
“Ach!” Sonia cried in terror.
“Well, why do you cry out? You want me to go to Siberia and now you arefrightened? But let me tell you: I shall not give myself up. I shallmake a struggle for it and they won’t do anything to me. They’ve no realevidence. Yesterday I was in great danger and believed I was lost; butto-day things are going better. All the facts they know can be explainedtwo ways, that’s to say I can turn their accusations to my credit, doyou understand? And I shall, for I’ve learnt my lesson. But they willcertainly arrest me. If it had not been for something that happened,they would have done so to-day for certain; perhaps even now they willarrest me to-day.... But that’s no matter, Sonia; they’ll let me outagain... for there isn’t any real proof against me, and there won’t be,I give you my word for it. And they can’t convict a man on what theyhave against me. Enough.... I only tell you that you may know.... I willtry to manage somehow to put it to my mother and sister so that theywon’t be frightened.... My sister’s future is secure, however, now, Ibelieve... and my mother’s must be too.... Well, that’s all. Be careful,though. Will you come and see me in prison when I am there?”
“Oh, I will, I will.”
They sat side by side, both mournful and dejected, as though they hadbeen cast up by the tempest alone on some deserted shore. He looked atSonia and felt how great was her love for him, and strange to say hefelt it suddenly burdensome and painful to be so loved. Yes, it was astrange and awful sensation! On his way to see Sonia he had felt thatall his hopes rested on her; he expected to be rid of at least partof his suffering, and now, when all her heart turned towards him, hesuddenly felt that he was immeasurably unhappier than before.
“Sonia,” he said, “you’d better not come and see me when I am inprison.”
Sonia did not answer, she was crying. Several minutes passed.
“Have you a cross on you?” she asked, as though suddenly thinking of it.
He did not at first understand the question.
“No, of course not. Here, take this one, of cypress wood. I haveanother, a copper one that belonged to Lizaveta. I changed withLizaveta: she gave me her cross and I gave her my little ikon. I willwear Lizaveta’s now and give you this. Take it... it’s mine! It’s mine,you know,” she begged him. “We will go to suffer together, and togetherwe will bear our cross!”
“Give it me,” said Raskolnikov.
He did not want to hurt her feelings. But immediately he drew back thehand he held out for the cross.
“Not now, Sonia. Better later,” he added to comfort her.
“Yes, yes, better,” she repeated with conviction, “when you go to meetyour suffering, then put it on. You will come to me, I’ll put it on you,we will pray and go together.”
At that moment someone knocked three times at the door.
“Sofya Semyonovna, may I come in?” they heard in a very familiar andpolite voice.
Sonia rushed to the door in a fright. The flaxen head of Mr.Lebeziatnikov appeared at the door.
CHAPTER V
Lebeziatnikov looked perturbed.
“I’ve come to you, Sofya Semyonovna,” he began. “Excuse me... I thoughtI should find you,” he said, addressing Raskolnikov suddenly, “that is,I didn’t mean anything... of that sort... But I just thought... KaterinaIvanovna has gone out of her mind,” he blurted out suddenly, turningfrom Raskolnikov to Sonia.
Sonia screamed.
“At least it seems so. But... we don’t know what to do, you see! Shecame back--she seems to have been turned out somewhere, perhapsbeaten.... So it seems at least,... She had run to your father’s formerchief, she didn’t find him at home: he was dining at some othergeneral’s.... Only fancy, she rushed off there, to the other general’s,and, imagine, she was so persistent that she managed to get the chief tosee her, had him fetched out from dinner, it seems. You can imagine whathappened. She was turned out, of course; but, according to her ownstory, she abused him and threw something at him. One may well believeit.... How it is she wasn’t taken up, I can’t understand! Now she istelling everyone, including Amalia Ivanovna; but it’s difficult tounderstand her, she is screaming and flinging herself about.... Oh yes,she shouts that since everyone has abandoned her, she will take thechildren and go into the street with a barrel-organ, and the childrenwill sing and dance, and she too, and collect money, and will go everyday under the general’s window... ‘to let everyone see well-bornchildren, whose father was an official, begging in the street.’ Shekeeps beating the children and they are all crying. She is teaching Lidato sing ‘My Village,’ the boy to dance, Polenka the same. She is tearingup all the clothes, and making them little caps like actors; she meansto carry a tin basin and make it tinkle, instead of music.... She won’tlisten to anything.... Imagine the state of things! It’s beyondanything!”
Lebeziatnikov would have gone on, but Sonia, who had heard him almostbreathless, snatched up her cloak and hat, and ran out of the room,putting on her things as she went. Raskolnikov followed her andLebeziatnikov came after him.
“She has certainly gone mad!” he said to Raskolnikov, as they went outinto the street. “I didn’t want to frighten Sofya Semyonovna, so I said‘it seemed like it,’ but there isn’t a doubt of it. They say that inconsumption the tubercles sometimes occur in the brain; it’s a pity Iknow nothing of medicine. I did try to persuade her, but she wouldn’tlisten.”
“Did you talk to her about the tubercles?”
“Not precisely of the tubercles. Besides, she wouldn’t have understood!But what I say is, that if you convince a person logically that hehas nothing to cry about, he’ll stop crying. That’s clear. Is it yourconviction that he won’t?”
“Life would be too easy if it were so,” answered Raskolnikov.
“Excuse me, excuse me; of course it would be rather difficult forKaterina Ivanovna to understand, but do you know that in Paris they havebeen conducting serious experiments as to the possibility of curing theinsane, simply by logical argument? One professor there, a scientificman of standing, lately dead, believed in the possibility of suchtreatment. His idea was that there’s nothing really wrong with thephysical organism of the insane, and that insanity is, so to say, alogical mistake, an error of judgment, an incorrect view of things. Hegradually showed the madman his error and, would you believe it, theysay he was successful? But as he made use of douches too, how farsuccess was due to that treatment remains uncertain.... So it seems atleast.”
Raskolnikov had long ceased to listen. Reaching the house where helived, he nodded to Lebeziatnikov and went in at the gate. Lebeziatnikovwoke up with a start, looked about him and hurried on.
Raskolnikov went into his little room and stood still in the middleof it. Why had he come back here? He looked at the yellow and tatteredpaper, at the dust, at his sofa.... From the yard came a loud continuousknocking; someone seemed to be hammering... He went to the window, roseon tiptoe and looked out into the yard for a long time with an air ofabsorbed attention. But the yard was empty and he could not see who washammering. In the house on the left he saw some open windows; on thewindow-sills were pots of sickly-looking geraniums. Linen was hung outof the windows... He knew it all by heart. He turned away and sat downon the sofa.
Never, never had he felt himself so fearfully alone!
Yes, he felt once more that he would perhaps come to hate Sonia, nowthat he had made her more miserable.
“Why had he gone to her to beg for her tears? What need had he to poisonher life? Oh, the meanness of it!”
“I will remain alone,” he said resolutely, “and she shall not come tothe prison!”
Five minutes later he raised his head with a strange smile. That was astrange thought.
“Perhaps it really would be better in Siberia,” he thought suddenly.
He could not have said how long he sat there with vague thoughts surgingthrough his mind. All at once the door opened and Dounia came in. Atfirst she stood still and looked at him from the doorway, just as hehad done at Sonia; then she came in and sat down in the same placeas yesterday, on the chair facing him. He looked silently and almostvacantly at her.
“Don’t be angry, brother; I’ve only come for one minute,” said Dounia.
Her face looked thoughtful but not stern. Her eyes were bright and soft.He saw that she too had come to him with love.
“Brother, now I know all, _all_. Dmitri Prokofitch has explained andtold me everything. They are worrying and persecuting you through astupid and contemptible suspicion.... Dmitri Prokofitch told me thatthere is no danger, and that you are wrong in looking upon it with suchhorror. I don’t think so, and I fully understand how indignant you mustbe, and that that indignation may have a permanent effect on you. That’swhat I am afraid of. As for your cutting yourself off from us, I don’tjudge you, I don’t venture to judge you, and forgive me for havingblamed you for it. I feel that I too, if I had so great a trouble,should keep away from everyone. I shall tell mother nothing _of this_,but I shall talk about you continually and shall tell her from you thatyou will come very soon. Don’t worry about her; _I_ will set her mind atrest; but don’t you try her too much--come once at least; remember thatshe is your mother. And now I have come simply to say” (Dounia beganto get up) “that if you should need me or should need... all my life oranything... call me, and I’ll come. Good-bye!”
She turned abruptly and went towards the door.
“Dounia!” Raskolnikov stopped her and went towards her. “That Razumihin,Dmitri Prokofitch, is a very good fellow.”
Dounia flushed slightly.
“Well?” she asked, waiting a moment.
“He is competent, hardworking, honest and capable of real love....Good-bye, Dounia.”
Dounia flushed crimson, then suddenly she took alarm.
“But what does it mean, brother? Are we really parting for ever thatyou... give me such a parting message?”
“Never mind.... Good-bye.”
He turned away, and walked to the window. She stood a moment, looked athim uneasily, and went out troubled.
No, he was not cold to her. There was an instant (the very last one)when he had longed to take her in his arms and _say good-bye_ to her,and even _to tell_ her, but he had not dared even to touch her hand.
“Afterwards she may shudder when she remembers that I embraced her, andwill feel that I stole her kiss.”
“And would _she_ stand that test?” he went on a few minutes later tohimself. “No, she wouldn’t; girls like that can’t stand things! Theynever do.”
And he thought of Sonia.
There was a breath of fresh air from the window. The daylight wasfading. He took up his cap and went out.
He could not, of course, and would not consider how ill he was. But allthis continual anxiety and agony of mind could not but affect him. Andif he were not lying in high fever it was perhaps just because thiscontinual inner strain helped to keep him on his legs and in possessionof his faculties. But this artificial excitement could not last long.
He wandered aimlessly. The sun was setting. A special form of misery hadbegun to oppress him of late. There was nothing poignant, nothing acuteabout it; but there was a feeling of permanence, of eternity about it;it brought a foretaste of hopeless years of this cold leaden misery, aforetaste of an eternity “on a square yard of space.” Towards eveningthis sensation usually began to weigh on him more heavily.
“With this idiotic, purely physical weakness, depending on the sunset orsomething, one can’t help doing something stupid! You’ll go to Dounia,as well as to Sonia,” he muttered bitterly.
He heard his name called. He looked round. Lebeziatnikov rushed up tohim.
“Only fancy, I’ve been to your room looking for you. Only fancy, she’scarried out her plan, and taken away the children. Sofya Semyonovna andI have had a job to find them. She is rapping on a frying-pan and makingthe children dance. The children are crying. They keep stopping at thecross-roads and in front of shops; there’s a crowd of fools runningafter them. Come along!”
“And Sonia?” Raskolnikov asked anxiously, hurrying after Lebeziatnikov.
“Simply frantic. That is, it’s not Sofya Semyonovna’s frantic, butKaterina Ivanovna, though Sofya Semyonova’s frantic too. But KaterinaIvanovna is absolutely frantic. I tell you she is quite mad. They’ll betaken to the police. You can fancy what an effect that will have....They are on the canal bank, near the bridge now, not far from SofyaSemyonovna’s, quite close.”
On the canal bank near the bridge and not two houses away from the onewhere Sonia lodged, there was a crowd of people, consisting principallyof gutter children. The hoarse broken voice of Katerina Ivanovna couldbe heard from the bridge, and it certainly was a strange spectaclelikely to attract a street crowd. Katerina Ivanovna in her old dresswith the green shawl, wearing a torn straw hat, crushed in a hideous wayon one side, was really frantic. She was exhausted and breathless. Herwasted consumptive face looked more suffering than ever, and indeed outof doors in the sunshine a consumptive always looks worse than at home.But her excitement did not flag, and every moment her irritation grewmore intense. She rushed at the children, shouted at them, coaxedthem, told them before the crowd how to dance and what to sing, beganexplaining to them why it was necessary, and driven to desperation bytheir not understanding, beat them.... Then she would make a rush at thecrowd; if she noticed any decently dressed person stopping to look, sheimmediately appealed to him to see what these children “from a genteel,one may say aristocratic, house” had been brought to. If she heardlaughter or jeering in the crowd, she would rush at once at the scoffersand begin squabbling with them. Some people laughed, others shook theirheads, but everyone felt curious at the sight of the madwoman with thefrightened children. The frying-pan of which Lebeziatnikov had spokenwas not there, at least Raskolnikov did not see it. But instead ofrapping on the pan, Katerina Ivanovna began clapping her wasted hands,when she made Lida and Kolya dance and Polenka sing. She too joined inthe singing, but broke down at the second note with a fearful cough,which made her curse in despair and even shed tears. What made her mostfurious was the weeping and terror of Kolya and Lida. Some effort hadbeen made to dress the children up as street singers are dressed. Theboy had on a turban made of something red and white to look like a Turk.There had been no costume for Lida; she simply had a red knitted cap,or rather a night cap that had belonged to Marmeladov, decorated witha broken piece of white ostrich feather, which had been KaterinaIvanovna’s grandmother’s and had been preserved as a family possession.Polenka was in her everyday dress; she looked in timid perplexity at hermother, and kept at her side, hiding her tears. She dimly realised hermother’s condition, and looked uneasily about her. She was terriblyfrightened of the street and the crowd. Sonia followed KaterinaIvanovna, weeping and beseeching her to return home, but KaterinaIvanovna was not to be persuaded.
“Leave off, Sonia, leave off,” she shouted, speaking fast, panting andcoughing. “You don’t know what you ask; you are like a child! I’vetold you before that I am not coming back to that drunken German. Leteveryone, let all Petersburg see the children begging in the streets,though their father was an honourable man who served all his life intruth and fidelity, and one may say died in the service.” (KaterinaIvanovna had by now invented this fantastic story and thoroughlybelieved it.) “Let that wretch of a general see it! And you are silly,Sonia: what have we to eat? Tell me that. We have worried you enough, Iwon’t go on so! Ah, Rodion Romanovitch, is that you?” she cried, seeingRaskolnikov and rushing up to him. “Explain to this silly girl, please,that nothing better could be done! Even organ-grinders earn theirliving, and everyone will see at once that we are different, that we arean honourable and bereaved family reduced to beggary. And that generalwill lose his post, you’ll see! We shall perform under his windows everyday, and if the Tsar drives by, I’ll fall on my knees, put the childrenbefore me, show them to him, and say ‘Defend us father.’ He is thefather of the fatherless, he is merciful, he’ll protect us, you’llsee, and that wretch of a general.... Lida, _tenez vous droite_! Kolya,you’ll dance again. Why are you whimpering? Whimpering again! Whatare you afraid of, stupid? Goodness, what am I to do with them, RodionRomanovitch? If you only knew how stupid they are! What’s one to do withsuch children?”
And she, almost crying herself--which did not stop her uninterrupted,rapid flow of talk--pointed to the crying children. Raskolnikov triedto persuade her to go home, and even said, hoping to work on her vanity,that it was unseemly for her to be wandering about the streets likean organ-grinder, as she was intending to become the principal of aboarding-school.
“A boarding-school, ha-ha-ha! A castle in the air,” cried KaterinaIvanovna, her laugh ending in a cough. “No, Rodion Romanovitch, thatdream is over! All have forsaken us!... And that general.... You know,Rodion Romanovitch, I threw an inkpot at him--it happened to be standingin the waiting-room by the paper where you sign your name. I wrote myname, threw it at him and ran away. Oh, the scoundrels, the scoundrels!But enough of them, now I’ll provide for the children myself, I won’tbow down to anybody! She has had to bear enough for us!” she pointedto Sonia. “Polenka, how much have you got? Show me! What, only twofarthings! Oh, the mean wretches! They give us nothing, only run afterus, putting their tongues out. There, what is that blockhead laughingat?” (She pointed to a man in the crowd.) “It’s all because Kolya hereis so stupid; I have such a bother with him. What do you want, Polenka?Tell me in French, _parlez-moi français_. Why, I’ve taught you, you knowsome phrases. Else how are you to show that you are of good family, wellbrought-up children, and not at all like other organ-grinders? We aren’tgoing to have a Punch and Judy show in the street, but to sing a genteelsong.... Ah, yes,... What are we to sing? You keep putting me out,but we... you see, we are standing here, Rodion Romanovitch, to findsomething to sing and get money, something Kolya can dance to.... For,as you can fancy, our performance is all impromptu.... We must talk itover and rehearse it all thoroughly, and then we shall go to Nevsky,where there are far more people of good society, and we shall be noticedat once. Lida knows ‘My Village’ only, nothing but ‘My Village,’ andeveryone sings that. We must sing something far more genteel.... Well,have you thought of anything, Polenka? If only you’d help your mother!My memory’s quite gone, or I should have thought of something. We reallycan’t sing ‘An Hussar.’ Ah, let us sing in French, ‘Cinq sous,’ I havetaught it you, I have taught it you. And as it is in French, people willsee at once that you are children of good family, and that will be muchmore touching.... You might sing ‘Marlborough s’en va-t-en guerre,’for that’s quite a child’s song and is sung as a lullaby in all thearistocratic houses.
“_Marlborough s’en va-t-en guerre Ne sait quand reviendra_...”she began singing. “But no, better sing ‘Cinq sous.’ Now, Kolya, yourhands on your hips, make haste, and you, Lida, keep turning the otherway, and Polenka and I will sing and clap our hands!
“_Cinq sous, cinq sous Pour monter notre menage_.”
(Cough-cough-cough!) “Set your dress straight, Polenka, it’s slippeddown on your shoulders,” she observed, panting from coughing. “Now it’sparticularly necessary to behave nicely and genteelly, that all maysee that you are well-born children. I said at the time that the bodiceshould be cut longer, and made of two widths. It was your fault, Sonia,with your advice to make it shorter, and now you see the child is quitedeformed by it.... Why, you’re all crying again! What’s the matter,stupids? Come, Kolya, begin. Make haste, make haste! Oh, what anunbearable child!
“Cinq sous, cinq sous.
“A policeman again! What do you want?”
A policeman was indeed forcing his way through the crowd. But at thatmoment a gentleman in civilian uniform and an overcoat--a solid-lookingofficial of about fifty with a decoration on his neck (which delightedKaterina Ivanovna and had its effect on the policeman)--approached andwithout a word handed her a green three-rouble note. His face worea look of genuine sympathy. Katerina Ivanovna took it and gave him apolite, even ceremonious, bow.
“I thank you, honoured sir,” she began loftily. “The causes that haveinduced us (take the money, Polenka: you see there are generous andhonourable people who are ready to help a poor gentlewoman in distress).You see, honoured sir, these orphans of good family--I might even say ofaristocratic connections--and that wretch of a general sat eatinggrouse... and stamped at my disturbing him. ‘Your excellency,’ I said,‘protect the orphans, for you knew my late husband, Semyon Zaharovitch,and on the very day of his death the basest of scoundrels slandered hisonly daughter.’... That policeman again! Protect me,” she cried to theofficial. “Why is that policeman edging up to me? We have only just runaway from one of them. What do you want, fool?”
“It’s forbidden in the streets. You mustn’t make a disturbance.”
“It’s you’re making a disturbance. It’s just the same as if I weregrinding an organ. What business is it of yours?”
“You have to get a licence for an organ, and you haven’t got one, and inthat way you collect a crowd. Where do you lodge?”
“What, a license?” wailed Katerina Ivanovna. “I buried my husbandto-day. What need of a license?”
“Calm yourself, madam, calm yourself,” began the official. “Come along;I will escort you.... This is no place for you in the crowd. You areill.”
“Honoured sir, honoured sir, you don’t know,” screamed KaterinaIvanovna. “We are going to the Nevsky.... Sonia, Sonia! Where is she?She is crying too! What’s the matter with you all? Kolya, Lida, whereare you going?” she cried suddenly in alarm. “Oh, silly children! Kolya,Lida, where are they off to?...”
Kolya and Lida, scared out of their wits by the crowd, and theirmother’s mad pranks, suddenly seized each other by the hand, and ran offat the sight of the policeman who wanted to take them away somewhere.Weeping and wailing, poor Katerina Ivanovna ran after them. She wasa piteous and unseemly spectacle, as she ran, weeping and panting forbreath. Sonia and Polenka rushed after them.
“Bring them back, bring them back, Sonia! Oh stupid, ungratefulchildren!... Polenka! catch them.... It’s for your sakes I...”
She stumbled as she ran and fell down.
“She’s cut herself, she’s bleeding! Oh, dear!” cried Sonia, bending overher.
All ran up and crowded around. Raskolnikov and Lebeziatnikov were thefirst at her side, the official too hastened up, and behind him thepoliceman who muttered, “Bother!” with a gesture of impatience, feelingthat the job was going to be a troublesome one.
“Pass on! Pass on!” he said to the crowd that pressed forward.
“She’s dying,” someone shouted.
“She’s gone out of her mind,” said another.
“Lord have mercy upon us,” said a woman, crossing herself. “Have theycaught the little girl and the boy? They’re being brought back, theelder one’s got them.... Ah, the naughty imps!”
When they examined Katerina Ivanovna carefully, they saw that she hadnot cut herself against a stone, as Sonia thought, but that the bloodthat stained the pavement red was from her chest.
“I’ve seen that before,” muttered the official to Raskolnikov andLebeziatnikov; “that’s consumption; the blood flows and chokes thepatient. I saw the same thing with a relative of my own not long ago...nearly a pint of blood, all in a minute.... What’s to be done though?She is dying.”
“This way, this way, to my room!” Sonia implored. “I live here!... See,that house, the second from here.... Come to me, make haste,” she turnedfrom one to the other. “Send for the doctor! Oh, dear!”
Thanks to the official’s efforts, this plan was adopted, the policemaneven helping to carry Katerina Ivanovna. She was carried to Sonia’sroom, almost unconscious, and laid on the bed. The blood was stillflowing, but she seemed to be coming to herself. Raskolnikov,Lebeziatnikov, and the official accompanied Sonia into the room and werefollowed by the policeman, who first drove back the crowd which followedto the very door. Polenka came in holding Kolya and Lida, whowere trembling and weeping. Several persons came in too from theKapernaumovs’ room; the landlord, a lame one-eyed man of strangeappearance with whiskers and hair that stood up like a brush, hiswife, a woman with an everlastingly scared expression, and severalopen-mouthed children with wonder-struck faces. Among these,Svidrigaïlov suddenly made his appearance. Raskolnikov looked at himwith surprise, not understanding where he had come from and not havingnoticed him in the crowd. A doctor and priest wore spoken of. Theofficial whispered to Raskolnikov that he thought it was too late nowfor the doctor, but he ordered him to be sent for. Kapernaumov ranhimself.
Meanwhile Katerina Ivanovna had regained her breath. The bleeding ceasedfor a time. She looked with sick but intent and penetrating eyes atSonia, who stood pale and trembling, wiping the sweat from her brow witha handkerchief. At last she asked to be raised. They sat her up on thebed, supporting her on both sides.
“Where are the children?” she said in a faint voice. “You’ve broughtthem, Polenka? Oh the sillies! Why did you run away.... Och!”
Once more her parched lips were covered with blood. She moved her eyes,looking about her.
“So that’s how you live, Sonia! Never once have I been in your room.”
She looked at her with a face of suffering.
“We have been your ruin, Sonia. Polenka, Lida, Kolya, come here! Well,here they are, Sonia, take them all! I hand them over to you, I’ve hadenough! The ball is over.” (Cough!) “Lay me down, let me die in peace.”
They laid her back on the pillow.
“What, the priest? I don’t want him. You haven’t got a rouble to spare.I have no sins. God must forgive me without that. He knows how I havesuffered.... And if He won’t forgive me, I don’t care!”
She sank more and more into uneasy delirium. At times she shuddered,turned her eyes from side to side, recognised everyone for a minute,but at once sank into delirium again. Her breathing was hoarse anddifficult, there was a sort of rattle in her throat.
“I said to him, your excellency,” she ejaculated, gasping after eachword. “That Amalia Ludwigovna, ah! Lida, Kolya, hands on your hips,make haste! _Glissez, glissez! pas de basque!_ Tap with your heels, be agraceful child!
“_Du hast Diamanten und Perlen_
“What next? That’s the thing to sing.
“_Du hast die schönsten Augen Mädchen, was willst du mehr?_
“What an idea! _Was willst du mehr?_ What things the fool invents! Ah,yes!
“In the heat of midday in the vale of Dagestan.
“Ah, how I loved it! I loved that song to distraction, Polenka! Yourfather, you know, used to sing it when we were engaged.... Oh thosedays! Oh that’s the thing for us to sing! How does it go? I’veforgotten. Remind me! How was it?”
She was violently excited and tried to sit up. At last, in a horriblyhoarse, broken voice, she began, shrieking and gasping at every word,with a look of growing terror.
“In the heat of midday!... in the vale!... of Dagestan!... With lead inmy breast!...”
“Your excellency!” she wailed suddenly with a heart-rending scream anda flood of tears, “protect the orphans! You have been their father’sguest... one may say aristocratic....” She started, regainingconsciousness, and gazed at all with a sort of terror, but at oncerecognised Sonia.
“Sonia, Sonia!” she articulated softly and caressingly, as thoughsurprised to find her there. “Sonia darling, are you here, too?”
They lifted her up again.
“Enough! It’s over! Farewell, poor thing! I am done for! I am broken!”she cried with vindictive despair, and her head fell heavily back on thepillow.
She sank into unconsciousness again, but this time it did not last long.Her pale, yellow, wasted face dropped back, her mouth fell open, her legmoved convulsively, she gave a deep, deep sigh and died.
Sonia fell upon her, flung her arms about her, and remained motionlesswith her head pressed to the dead woman’s wasted bosom. Polenka threwherself at her mother’s feet, kissing them and weeping violently. ThoughKolya and Lida did not understand what had happened, they had a feelingthat it was something terrible; they put their hands on each other’slittle shoulders, stared straight at one another and both at once openedtheir mouths and began screaming. They were both still in their fancydress; one in a turban, the other in the cap with the ostrich feather.
And how did “the certificate of merit” come to be on the bed besideKaterina Ivanovna? It lay there by the pillow; Raskolnikov saw it.
He walked away to the window. Lebeziatnikov skipped up to him.
“She is dead,” he said.
“Rodion Romanovitch, I must have two words with you,” said Svidrigaïlov,coming up to them.
Lebeziatnikov at once made room for him and delicately withdrew.Svidrigaïlov drew Raskolnikov further away.
“I will undertake all the arrangements, the funeral and that. You knowit’s a question of money and, as I told you, I have plenty to spare. Iwill put those two little ones and Polenka into some good orphan asylum,and I will settle fifteen hundred roubles to be paid to each on comingof age, so that Sofya Semyonovna need have no anxiety about them. And Iwill pull her out of the mud too, for she is a good girl, isn’t she? Sotell Avdotya Romanovna that that is how I am spending her ten thousand.”
“What is your motive for such benevolence?” asked Raskolnikov.
“Ah! you sceptical person!” laughed Svidrigaïlov. “I told you I had noneed of that money. Won’t you admit that it’s simply done from humanity?She wasn’t ‘a louse,’ you know” (he pointed to the corner where thedead woman lay), “was she, like some old pawnbroker woman? Come, you’llagree, is Luzhin to go on living, and doing wicked things or is she todie? And if I didn’t help them, Polenka would go the same way.”
He said this with an air of a sort of gay winking slyness, keeping hiseyes fixed on Raskolnikov, who turned white and cold, hearing his ownphrases, spoken to Sonia. He quickly stepped back and looked wildly atSvidrigaïlov.
“How do you know?” he whispered, hardly able to breathe.
“Why, I lodge here at Madame Resslich’s, the other side of the wall.Here is Kapernaumov, and there lives Madame Resslich, an old and devotedfriend of mine. I am a neighbour.”
“You?”
“Yes,” continued Svidrigaïlov, shaking with laughter. “I assure youon my honour, dear Rodion Romanovitch, that you have interested meenormously. I told you we should become friends, I foretold it. Well,here we have. And you will see what an accommodating person I am. You’llsee that you can get on with me!”
