PART VI
CHAPTER I
A strange period began for Raskolnikov: it was as though a fog hadfallen upon him and wrapped him in a dreary solitude from which therewas no escape. Recalling that period long after, he believed that hismind had been clouded at times, and that it had continued so, withintervals, till the final catastrophe. He was convinced that he had beenmistaken about many things at that time, for instance as to the dateof certain events. Anyway, when he tried later on to piece hisrecollections together, he learnt a great deal about himself from whatother people told him. He had mixed up incidents and had explainedevents as due to circumstances which existed only in his imagination. Attimes he was a prey to agonies of morbid uneasiness, amounting sometimesto panic. But he remembered, too, moments, hours, perhaps whole days,of complete apathy, which came upon him as a reaction from his previousterror and might be compared with the abnormal insensibility, sometimesseen in the dying. He seemed to be trying in that latter stage to escapefrom a full and clear understanding of his position. Certain essentialfacts which required immediate consideration were particularly irksometo him. How glad he would have been to be free from some cares, theneglect of which would have threatened him with complete, inevitableruin.
He was particularly worried about Svidrigaïlov, he might be said to bepermanently thinking of Svidrigaïlov. From the time of Svidrigaïlov’stoo menacing and unmistakable words in Sonia’s room at the moment ofKaterina Ivanovna’s death, the normal working of his mind seemed tobreak down. But although this new fact caused him extreme uneasiness,Raskolnikov was in no hurry for an explanation of it. At times, findinghimself in a solitary and remote part of the town, in some wretchedeating-house, sitting alone lost in thought, hardly knowing how he hadcome there, he suddenly thought of Svidrigaïlov. He recognisedsuddenly, clearly, and with dismay that he ought at once to come to anunderstanding with that man and to make what terms he could. Walkingoutside the city gates one day, he positively fancied that they hadfixed a meeting there, that he was waiting for Svidrigaïlov. Anothertime he woke up before daybreak lying on the ground under some bushesand could not at first understand how he had come there.
But during the two or three days after Katerina Ivanovna’s death, hehad two or three times met Svidrigaïlov at Sonia’s lodging, where hehad gone aimlessly for a moment. They exchanged a few words and made noreference to the vital subject, as though they were tacitly agreed notto speak of it for a time.
Katerina Ivanovna’s body was still lying in the coffin, Svidrigaïlov wasbusy making arrangements for the funeral. Sonia too was very busy. Attheir last meeting Svidrigaïlov informed Raskolnikov that he had madean arrangement, and a very satisfactory one, for Katerina Ivanovna’schildren; that he had, through certain connections, succeeded in gettinghold of certain personages by whose help the three orphans could be atonce placed in very suitable institutions; that the money he had settledon them had been of great assistance, as it is much easier to placeorphans with some property than destitute ones. He said somethingtoo about Sonia and promised to come himself in a day or two to seeRaskolnikov, mentioning that “he would like to consult with him, thatthere were things they must talk over....”
This conversation took place in the passage on the stairs. Svidrigaïlovlooked intently at Raskolnikov and suddenly, after a brief pause,dropping his voice, asked: “But how is it, Rodion Romanovitch; youdon’t seem yourself? You look and you listen, but you don’t seem tounderstand. Cheer up! We’ll talk things over; I am only sorry, I’veso much to do of my own business and other people’s. Ah, RodionRomanovitch,” he added suddenly, “what all men need is fresh air, freshair... more than anything!”
He moved to one side to make way for the priest and server, whowere coming up the stairs. They had come for the requiem service. BySvidrigaïlov’s orders it was sung twice a day punctually. Svidrigaïlovwent his way. Raskolnikov stood still a moment, thought, and followedthe priest into Sonia’s room. He stood at the door. They began quietly,slowly and mournfully singing the service. From his childhood thethought of death and the presence of death had something oppressiveand mysteriously awful; and it was long since he had heard the requiemservice. And there was something else here as well, too awful anddisturbing. He looked at the children: they were all kneeling by thecoffin; Polenka was weeping. Behind them Sonia prayed, softly and, as itwere, timidly weeping.
“These last two days she hasn’t said a word to me, she hasn’t glanced atme,” Raskolnikov thought suddenly. The sunlight was bright in the room;the incense rose in clouds; the priest read, “Give rest, oh Lord....”Raskolnikov stayed all through the service. As he blessed them andtook his leave, the priest looked round strangely. After the service,Raskolnikov went up to Sonia. She took both his hands and let herhead sink on his shoulder. This slight friendly gesture bewilderedRaskolnikov. It seemed strange to him that there was no trace ofrepugnance, no trace of disgust, no tremor in her hand. It was thefurthest limit of self-abnegation, at least so he interpreted it.
Sonia said nothing. Raskolnikov pressed her hand and went out. He feltvery miserable. If it had been possible to escape to some solitude, hewould have thought himself lucky, even if he had to spend his whole lifethere. But although he had almost always been by himself of late, he hadnever been able to feel alone. Sometimes he walked out of the town on tothe high road, once he had even reached a little wood, but the lonelierthe place was, the more he seemed to be aware of an uneasy presence nearhim. It did not frighten him, but greatly annoyed him, so that hemade haste to return to the town, to mingle with the crowd, to enterrestaurants and taverns, to walk in busy thoroughfares. There he felteasier and even more solitary. One day at dusk he sat for an hourlistening to songs in a tavern and he remembered that he positivelyenjoyed it. But at last he had suddenly felt the same uneasiness again,as though his conscience smote him. “Here I sit listening to singing,is that what I ought to be doing?” he thought. Yet he felt at oncethat that was not the only cause of his uneasiness; there was somethingrequiring immediate decision, but it was something he could not clearlyunderstand or put into words. It was a hopeless tangle. “No, better thestruggle again! Better Porfiry again... or Svidrigaïlov.... Better somechallenge again... some attack. Yes, yes!” he thought. He went out ofthe tavern and rushed away almost at a run. The thought of Dounia andhis mother suddenly reduced him almost to a panic. That night he wokeup before morning among some bushes in Krestovsky Island, tremblingall over with fever; he walked home, and it was early morning when hearrived. After some hours’ sleep the fever left him, but he woke uplate, two o’clock in the afternoon.
He remembered that Katerina Ivanovna’s funeral had been fixed for thatday, and was glad that he was not present at it. Nastasya brought himsome food; he ate and drank with appetite, almost with greediness. Hishead was fresher and he was calmer than he had been for the last threedays. He even felt a passing wonder at his previous attacks of panic.
The door opened and Razumihin came in.
“Ah, he’s eating, then he’s not ill,” said Razumihin. He took a chairand sat down at the table opposite Raskolnikov.
He was troubled and did not attempt to conceal it. He spoke with evidentannoyance, but without hurry or raising his voice. He looked as thoughhe had some special fixed determination.
“Listen,” he began resolutely. “As far as I am concerned, you may all goto hell, but from what I see, it’s clear to me that I can’t make head ortail of it; please don’t think I’ve come to ask you questions. I don’twant to know, hang it! If you begin telling me your secrets, I dare sayI shouldn’t stay to listen, I should go away cursing. I have only cometo find out once for all whether it’s a fact that you are mad? There isa conviction in the air that you are mad or very nearly so. I admitI’ve been disposed to that opinion myself, judging from your stupid,repulsive and quite inexplicable actions, and from your recent behaviorto your mother and sister. Only a monster or a madman could treat themas you have; so you must be mad.”
“When did you see them last?”
“Just now. Haven’t you seen them since then? What have you been doingwith yourself? Tell me, please. I’ve been to you three times already.Your mother has been seriously ill since yesterday. She had made upher mind to come to you; Avdotya Romanovna tried to prevent her; shewouldn’t hear a word. ‘If he is ill, if his mind is giving way, who canlook after him like his mother?’ she said. We all came here together, wecouldn’t let her come alone all the way. We kept begging her to be calm.We came in, you weren’t here; she sat down, and stayed ten minutes,while we stood waiting in silence. She got up and said: ‘If he’sgone out, that is, if he is well, and has forgotten his mother, it’shumiliating and unseemly for his mother to stand at his door begging forkindness.’ She returned home and took to her bed; now she is in a fever.‘I see,’ she said, ‘that he has time for _his girl_.’ She means by _yourgirl_ Sofya Semyonovna, your betrothed or your mistress, I don’t know. Iwent at once to Sofya Semyonovna’s, for I wanted to know what was goingon. I looked round, I saw the coffin, the children crying, andSofya Semyonovna trying them on mourning dresses. No sign of you. Iapologised, came away, and reported to Avdotya Romanovna. So that’s allnonsense and you haven’t got a girl; the most likely thing is that youare mad. But here you sit, guzzling boiled beef as though you’d not hada bite for three days. Though as far as that goes, madmen eat too, butthough you have not said a word to me yet... you are not mad! That I’dswear! Above all, you are not mad! So you may go to hell, all of you,for there’s some mystery, some secret about it, and I don’t intend toworry my brains over your secrets. So I’ve simply come to swear at you,”he finished, getting up, “to relieve my mind. And I know what to donow.”
“What do you mean to do now?”
“What business is it of yours what I mean to do?”
“You are going in for a drinking bout.”
“How... how did you know?”
“Why, it’s pretty plain.”
Razumihin paused for a minute.
“You always have been a very rational person and you’ve never been mad,never,” he observed suddenly with warmth. “You’re right: I shall drink.Good-bye!”
And he moved to go out.
“I was talking with my sister--the day before yesterday, I think itwas--about you, Razumihin.”
“About me! But... where can you have seen her the day before yesterday?”Razumihin stopped short and even turned a little pale.
One could see that his heart was throbbing slowly and violently.
“She came here by herself, sat there and talked to me.”
“She did!”
“Yes.”
“What did you say to her... I mean, about me?”
“I told her you were a very good, honest, and industrious man. I didn’ttell her you love her, because she knows that herself.”
“She knows that herself?”
“Well, it’s pretty plain. Wherever I might go, whatever happened to me,you would remain to look after them. I, so to speak, give them into yourkeeping, Razumihin. I say this because I know quite well how you loveher, and am convinced of the purity of your heart. I know that she toomay love you and perhaps does love you already. Now decide for yourself,as you know best, whether you need go in for a drinking bout or not.”
“Rodya! You see... well.... Ach, damn it! But where do you mean to go?Of course, if it’s all a secret, never mind.... But I... I shall findout the secret... and I am sure that it must be some ridiculous nonsenseand that you’ve made it all up. Anyway you are a capital fellow, acapital fellow!...”
“That was just what I wanted to add, only you interrupted, that that wasa very good decision of yours not to find out these secrets. Leave it totime, don’t worry about it. You’ll know it all in time when it must be.Yesterday a man said to me that what a man needs is fresh air, freshair, fresh air. I mean to go to him directly to find out what he meantby that.”
Razumihin stood lost in thought and excitement, making a silentconclusion.
“He’s a political conspirator! He must be. And he’s on the eve of somedesperate step, that’s certain. It can only be that! And... and Douniaknows,” he thought suddenly.
“So Avdotya Romanovna comes to see you,” he said, weighing eachsyllable, “and you’re going to see a man who says we need more air, andso of course that letter... that too must have something to do with it,”he concluded to himself.
“What letter?”
“She got a letter to-day. It upset her very much--very much indeed. Toomuch so. I began speaking of you, she begged me not to. Then... thenshe said that perhaps we should very soon have to part... then she beganwarmly thanking me for something; then she went to her room and lockedherself in.”
“She got a letter?” Raskolnikov asked thoughtfully.
“Yes, and you didn’t know? hm...”
They were both silent.
“Good-bye, Rodion. There was a time, brother, when I.... Never mind,good-bye. You see, there was a time.... Well, good-bye! I must be offtoo. I am not going to drink. There’s no need now.... That’s all stuff!”
He hurried out; but when he had almost closed the door behind him, hesuddenly opened it again, and said, looking away:
“Oh, by the way, do you remember that murder, you know Porfiry’s, thatold woman? Do you know the murderer has been found, he has confessedand given the proofs. It’s one of those very workmen, the painter, onlyfancy! Do you remember I defended them here? Would you believe it, allthat scene of fighting and laughing with his companions on the stairswhile the porter and the two witnesses were going up, he got up onpurpose to disarm suspicion. The cunning, the presence of mind of theyoung dog! One can hardly credit it; but it’s his own explanation, hehas confessed it all. And what a fool I was about it! Well, he’s simplya genius of hypocrisy and resourcefulness in disarming the suspicions ofthe lawyers--so there’s nothing much to wonder at, I suppose! Of coursepeople like that are always possible. And the fact that he couldn’t keepup the character, but confessed, makes him easier to believe in. Butwhat a fool I was! I was frantic on their side!”
“Tell me, please, from whom did you hear that, and why does it interestyou so?” Raskolnikov asked with unmistakable agitation.
“What next? You ask me why it interests me!... Well, I heard it fromPorfiry, among others... It was from him I heard almost all about it.”
“From Porfiry?”
“From Porfiry.”
“What... what did he say?” Raskolnikov asked in dismay.
“He gave me a capital explanation of it. Psychologically, after hisfashion.”
“He explained it? Explained it himself?”
“Yes, yes; good-bye. I’ll tell you all about it another time, but nowI’m busy. There was a time when I fancied... But no matter, anothertime!... What need is there for me to drink now? You have made me drunkwithout wine. I am drunk, Rodya! Good-bye, I’m going. I’ll come againvery soon.”
He went out.
“He’s a political conspirator, there’s not a doubt about it,” Razumihindecided, as he slowly descended the stairs. “And he’s drawn his sisterin; that’s quite, quite in keeping with Avdotya Romanovna’s character.There are interviews between them!... She hinted at it too... So many ofher words.... and hints... bear that meaning! And how else can all thistangle be explained? Hm! And I was almost thinking... Good heavens,what I thought! Yes, I took leave of my senses and I wronged him! It washis doing, under the lamp in the corridor that day. Pfoo! What a crude,nasty, vile idea on my part! Nikolay is a brick, for confessing.... Andhow clear it all is now! His illness then, all his strange actions...before this, in the university, how morose he used to be, how gloomy....But what’s the meaning now of that letter? There’s something in that,too, perhaps. Whom was it from? I suspect...! No, I must find out!”
He thought of Dounia, realising all he had heard and his heart throbbed,and he suddenly broke into a run.
As soon as Razumihin went out, Raskolnikov got up, turned to the window,walked into one corner and then into another, as though forgetting thesmallness of his room, and sat down again on the sofa. He felt, so tospeak, renewed; again the struggle, so a means of escape had come.
“Yes, a means of escape had come! It had been too stifling, toocramping, the burden had been too agonising. A lethargy had come uponhim at times. From the moment of the scene with Nikolay at Porfiry’s hehad been suffocating, penned in without hope of escape. After Nikolay’sconfession, on that very day had come the scene with Sonia; hisbehaviour and his last words had been utterly unlike anything hecould have imagined beforehand; he had grown feebler, instantly andfundamentally! And he had agreed at the time with Sonia, he had agreedin his heart he could not go on living alone with such a thing on hismind!
“And Svidrigaïlov was a riddle... He worried him, that was true, butsomehow not on the same point. He might still have a struggle to comewith Svidrigaïlov. Svidrigaïlov, too, might be a means of escape; butPorfiry was a different matter.
“And so Porfiry himself had explained it to Razumihin, had explained it_psychologically_. He had begun bringing in his damned psychology again!Porfiry? But to think that Porfiry should for one moment believe thatNikolay was guilty, after what had passed between them before Nikolay’sappearance, after that tête-à-tête interview, which could have only_one_ explanation? (During those days Raskolnikov had often recalledpassages in that scene with Porfiry; he could not bear to let his mindrest on it.) Such words, such gestures had passed between them, theyhad exchanged such glances, things had been said in such a tone and hadreached such a pass, that Nikolay, whom Porfiry had seen through at thefirst word, at the first gesture, could not have shaken his conviction.
“And to think that even Razumihin had begun to suspect! The scene in thecorridor under the lamp had produced its effect then. He had rushed toPorfiry.... But what had induced the latter to receive him like that?What had been his object in putting Razumihin off with Nikolay? He musthave some plan; there was some design, but what was it? It was true thata long time had passed since that morning--too long a time--and no sightnor sound of Porfiry. Well, that was a bad sign....”
Raskolnikov took his cap and went out of the room, still pondering. Itwas the first time for a long while that he had felt clear in his mind,at least. “I must settle Svidrigaïlov,” he thought, “and as soon aspossible; he, too, seems to be waiting for me to come to him of my ownaccord.” And at that moment there was such a rush of hate in hisweary heart that he might have killed either of those two--Porfiry orSvidrigaïlov. At least he felt that he would be capable of doing itlater, if not now.
“We shall see, we shall see,” he repeated to himself.
But no sooner had he opened the door than he stumbled upon Porfiryhimself in the passage. He was coming in to see him. Raskolnikov wasdumbfounded for a minute, but only for one minute. Strange to say, hewas not very much astonished at seeing Porfiry and scarcely afraid ofhim. He was simply startled, but was quickly, instantly, on his guard.“Perhaps this will mean the end? But how could Porfiry have approachedso quietly, like a cat, so that he had heard nothing? Could he have beenlistening at the door?”
“You didn’t expect a visitor, Rodion Romanovitch,” Porfiry explained,laughing. “I’ve been meaning to look in a long time; I was passing byand thought why not go in for five minutes. Are you going out? I won’tkeep you long. Just let me have one cigarette.”
“Sit down, Porfiry Petrovitch, sit down.” Raskolnikov gave his visitora seat with so pleased and friendly an expression that he would havemarvelled at himself, if he could have seen it.
The last moment had come, the last drops had to be drained! So a manwill sometimes go through half an hour of mortal terror with a brigand,yet when the knife is at his throat at last, he feels no fear.
Raskolnikov seated himself directly facing Porfiry, and looked at himwithout flinching. Porfiry screwed up his eyes and began lighting acigarette.
“Speak, speak,” seemed as though it would burst from Raskolnikov’sheart. “Come, why don’t you speak?”
CHAPTER II
“Ah these cigarettes!” Porfiry Petrovitch ejaculated at last, havinglighted one. “They are pernicious, positively pernicious, and yet Ican’t give them up! I cough, I begin to have tickling in my throat anda difficulty in breathing. You know I am a coward, I went lately toDr. B----n; he always gives at least half an hour to each patient. Hepositively laughed looking at me; he sounded me: ‘Tobacco’s bad foryou,’ he said, ‘your lungs are affected.’ But how am I to give it up?What is there to take its place? I don’t drink, that’s the mischief,he-he-he, that I don’t. Everything is relative, Rodion Romanovitch,everything is relative!”
“Why, he’s playing his professional tricks again,” Raskolnikov thoughtwith disgust. All the circumstances of their last interview suddenlycame back to him, and he felt a rush of the feeling that had come uponhim then.
“I came to see you the day before yesterday, in the evening; you didn’tknow?” Porfiry Petrovitch went on, looking round the room. “I came intothis very room. I was passing by, just as I did to-day, and I thoughtI’d return your call. I walked in as your door was wide open, I lookedround, waited and went out without leaving my name with your servant.Don’t you lock your door?”
Raskolnikov’s face grew more and more gloomy. Porfiry seemed to guesshis state of mind.
“I’ve come to have it out with you, Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow!I owe you an explanation and must give it to you,” he continued with aslight smile, just patting Raskolnikov’s knee.
But almost at the same instant a serious and careworn look came into hisface; to his surprise Raskolnikov saw a touch of sadness in it. He hadnever seen and never suspected such an expression in his face.
“A strange scene passed between us last time we met, Rodion Romanovitch.Our first interview, too, was a strange one; but then... and one thingafter another! This is the point: I have perhaps acted unfairly to you;I feel it. Do you remember how we parted? Your nerves were unhinged andyour knees were shaking and so were mine. And, you know, our behaviourwas unseemly, even ungentlemanly. And yet we are gentlemen, above all,in any case, gentlemen; that must be understood. Do you remember what wecame to?... and it was quite indecorous.”
“What is he up to, what does he take me for?” Raskolnikov asked himselfin amazement, raising his head and looking with open eyes on Porfiry.
“I’ve decided openness is better between us,” Porfiry Petrovitch wenton, turning his head away and dropping his eyes, as though unwilling todisconcert his former victim and as though disdaining his former wiles.“Yes, such suspicions and such scenes cannot continue for long. Nikolayput a stop to it, or I don’t know what we might not have come to. Thatdamned workman was sitting at the time in the next room--can you realisethat? You know that, of course; and I am aware that he came to youafterwards. But what you supposed then was not true: I had not sent foranyone, I had made no kind of arrangements. You ask why I hadn’t? Whatshall I say to you? it had all come upon me so suddenly. I had scarcelysent for the porters (you noticed them as you went out, I dare say).An idea flashed upon me; I was firmly convinced at the time, you see,Rodion Romanovitch. Come, I thought--even if I let one thing slip fora time, I shall get hold of something else--I shan’t lose what I want,anyway. You are nervously irritable, Rodion Romanovitch, by temperament;it’s out of proportion with other qualities of your heart and character,which I flatter myself I have to some extent divined. Of course I didreflect even then that it does not always happen that a man gets up andblurts out his whole story. It does happen sometimes, if you make aman lose all patience, though even then it’s rare. I was capable ofrealising that. If I only had a fact, I thought, the least little factto go upon, something I could lay hold of, something tangible, notmerely psychological. For if a man is guilty, you must be able to getsomething substantial out of him; one may reckon upon most surprisingresults indeed. I was reckoning on your temperament, Rodion Romanovitch,on your temperament above all things! I had great hopes of you at thattime.”
“But what are you driving at now?” Raskolnikov muttered at last, askingthe question without thinking.
“What is he talking about?” he wondered distractedly, “does he reallytake me to be innocent?”
“What am I driving at? I’ve come to explain myself, I consider it myduty, so to speak. I want to make clear to you how the whole business,the whole misunderstanding arose. I’ve caused you a great deal ofsuffering, Rodion Romanovitch. I am not a monster. I understand whatit must mean for a man who has been unfortunate, but who is proud,imperious and above all, impatient, to have to bear such treatment!I regard you in any case as a man of noble character and not withoutelements of magnanimity, though I don’t agree with all your convictions.I wanted to tell you this first, frankly and quite sincerely, for aboveall I don’t want to deceive you. When I made your acquaintance, I feltattracted by you. Perhaps you will laugh at my saying so. You have aright to. I know you disliked me from the first and indeed you’ve noreason to like me. You may think what you like, but I desire now to doall I can to efface that impression and to show that I am a man of heartand conscience. I speak sincerely.”
Porfiry Petrovitch made a dignified pause. Raskolnikov felt a rush ofrenewed alarm. The thought that Porfiry believed him to be innocentbegan to make him uneasy.
“It’s scarcely necessary to go over everything in detail,” PorfiryPetrovitch went on. “Indeed, I could scarcely attempt it. To begin withthere were rumours. Through whom, how, and when those rumours came tome... and how they affected you, I need not go into. My suspicionswere aroused by a complete accident, which might just as easily not havehappened. What was it? Hm! I believe there is no need to go into thateither. Those rumours and that accident led to one idea in my mind. Iadmit it openly--for one may as well make a clean breast of it--I wasthe first to pitch on you. The old woman’s notes on the pledges andthe rest of it--that all came to nothing. Yours was one of a hundred.I happened, too, to hear of the scene at the office, from a man whodescribed it capitally, unconsciously reproducing the scene with greatvividness. It was just one thing after another, Rodion Romanovitch, mydear fellow! How could I avoid being brought to certain ideas? From ahundred rabbits you can’t make a horse, a hundred suspicions don’t makea proof, as the English proverb says, but that’s only from the rationalpoint of view--you can’t help being partial, for after all a lawyeris only human. I thought, too, of your article in that journal, do youremember, on your first visit we talked of it? I jeered at you at thetime, but that was only to lead you on. I repeat, Rodion Romanovitch,you are ill and impatient. That you were bold, headstrong, in earnestand... had felt a great deal I recognised long before. I, too, have feltthe same, so that your article seemed familiar to me. It was conceivedon sleepless nights, with a throbbing heart, in ecstasy and suppressedenthusiasm. And that proud suppressed enthusiasm in young people isdangerous! I jeered at you then, but let me tell you that, as a literaryamateur, I am awfully fond of such first essays, full of the heat ofyouth. There is a mistiness and a chord vibrating in the mist. Yourarticle is absurd and fantastic, but there’s a transparent sincerity,a youthful incorruptible pride and the daring of despair in it. It’s agloomy article, but that’s what’s fine in it. I read your article andput it aside, thinking as I did so ‘that man won’t go the common way.’Well, I ask you, after that as a preliminary, how could I help beingcarried away by what followed? Oh, dear, I am not saying anything, Iam not making any statement now. I simply noted it at the time. What isthere in it? I reflected. There’s nothing in it, that is really nothingand perhaps absolutely nothing. And it’s not at all the thing forthe prosecutor to let himself be carried away by notions: here I haveNikolay on my hands with actual evidence against him--you may think whatyou like of it, but it’s evidence. He brings in his psychology, too; onehas to consider him, too, for it’s a matter of life and death. Why amI explaining this to you? That you may understand, and not blame mymalicious behaviour on that occasion. It was not malicious, I assureyou, he-he! Do you suppose I didn’t come to search your room at thetime? I did, I did, he-he! I was here when you were lying ill in bed,not officially, not in my own person, but I was here. Your room wassearched to the last thread at the first suspicion; but _umsonst_! Ithought to myself, now that man will come, will come of himself andquickly, too; if he’s guilty, he’s sure to come. Another man wouldn’t,but he will. And you remember how Mr. Razumihin began discussing thesubject with you? We arranged that to excite you, so we purposely spreadrumours, that he might discuss the case with you, and Razumihin is not aman to restrain his indignation. Mr. Zametov was tremendously struck byyour anger and your open daring. Think of blurting out in a restaurant‘I killed her.’ It was too daring, too reckless. I thought so myself, ifhe is guilty he will be a formidable opponent. That was what I thoughtat the time. I was expecting you. But you simply bowled Zametov overand... well, you see, it all lies in this--that this damnable psychologycan be taken two ways! Well, I kept expecting you, and so it was, youcame! My heart was fairly throbbing. Ach!
“Now, why need you have come? Your laughter, too, as you came in, do youremember? I saw it all plain as daylight, but if I hadn’t expected youso specially, I should not have noticed anything in your laughter. Yousee what influence a mood has! Mr. Razumihin then--ah, that stone, thatstone under which the things were hidden! I seem to see it somewherein a kitchen garden. It was in a kitchen garden, you told Zametov andafterwards you repeated that in my office? And when we began pickingyour article to pieces, how you explained it! One could take every wordof yours in two senses, as though there were another meaning hidden.
“So in this way, Rodion Romanovitch, I reached the furthest limit, andknocking my head against a post, I pulled myself up, asking myself whatI was about. After all, I said, you can take it all in another sense ifyou like, and it’s more natural so, indeed. I couldn’t help admittingit was more natural. I was bothered! ‘No, I’d better get hold of somelittle fact’ I said. So when I heard of the bell-ringing, I held mybreath and was all in a tremor. ‘Here is my little fact,’ thought I, andI didn’t think it over, I simply wouldn’t. I would have given a thousandroubles at that minute to have seen you with my own eyes, when youwalked a hundred paces beside that workman, after he had called youmurderer to your face, and you did not dare to ask him a questionall the way. And then what about your trembling, what about yourbell-ringing in your illness, in semi-delirium?
“And so, Rodion Romanovitch, can you wonder that I played such pranks onyou? And what made you come at that very minute? Someone seemed tohave sent you, by Jove! And if Nikolay had not parted us... and do youremember Nikolay at the time? Do you remember him clearly? It was athunderbolt, a regular thunderbolt! And how I met him! I didn’t believein the thunderbolt, not for a minute. You could see it for yourself;and how could I? Even afterwards, when you had gone and he began makingvery, very plausible answers on certain points, so that I was surprisedat him myself, even then I didn’t believe his story! You see what it isto be as firm as a rock! No, thought I, _Morgenfrüh_. What has Nikolaygot to do with it!”
“Razumihin told me just now that you think Nikolay guilty and hadyourself assured him of it....”
His voice failed him, and he broke off. He had been listening inindescribable agitation, as this man who had seen through and throughhim, went back upon himself. He was afraid of believing it and did notbelieve it. In those still ambiguous words he kept eagerly looking forsomething more definite and conclusive.
“Mr. Razumihin!” cried Porfiry Petrovitch, seeming glad of a questionfrom Raskolnikov, who had till then been silent. “He-he-he! But I had toput Mr. Razumihin off; two is company, three is none. Mr. Razumihin isnot the right man, besides he is an outsider. He came running to mewith a pale face.... But never mind him, why bring him in? To returnto Nikolay, would you like to know what sort of a type he is, how Iunderstand him, that is? To begin with, he is still a child and notexactly a coward, but something by way of an artist. Really, don’t laughat my describing him so. He is innocent and responsive to influence. Hehas a heart, and is a fantastic fellow. He sings and dances, he tellsstories, they say, so that people come from other villages to hear him.He attends school too, and laughs till he cries if you hold up a fingerto him; he will drink himself senseless--not as a regular vice, but attimes, when people treat him, like a child. And he stole, too, then,without knowing it himself, for ‘How can it be stealing, if one picks itup?’ And do you know he is an Old Believer, or rather a dissenter? Therehave been Wanderers[*] in his family, and he was for two years in hisvillage under the spiritual guidance of a certain elder. I learnt allthis from Nikolay and from his fellow villagers. And what’s more, hewanted to run into the wilderness! He was full of fervour, prayed atnight, read the old books, ‘the true’ ones, and read himself crazy.
[*] A religious sect.--TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.
“Petersburg had a great effect upon him, especially the women and thewine. He responds to everything and he forgot the elder and all that. Ilearnt that an artist here took a fancy to him, and used to go and seehim, and now this business came upon him.
“Well, he was frightened, he tried to hang himself! He ran away! How canone get over the idea the people have of Russian legal proceedings? Thevery word ‘trial’ frightens some of them. Whose fault is it? We shallsee what the new juries will do. God grant they do good! Well, inprison, it seems, he remembered the venerable elder; the Bible, too,made its appearance again. Do you know, Rodion Romanovitch, the force ofthe word ‘suffering’ among some of these people! It’s not a question ofsuffering for someone’s benefit, but simply, ‘one must suffer.’ If theysuffer at the hands of the authorities, so much the better. In my timethere was a very meek and mild prisoner who spent a whole year in prisonalways reading his Bible on the stove at night and he read himselfcrazy, and so crazy, do you know, that one day, apropos of nothing, heseized a brick and flung it at the governor; though he had done himno harm. And the way he threw it too: aimed it a yard on one sideon purpose, for fear of hurting him. Well, we know what happens toa prisoner who assaults an officer with a weapon. So ‘he took hissuffering.’
“So I suspect now that Nikolay wants to take his suffering or somethingof the sort. I know it for certain from facts, indeed. Only he doesn’tknow that I know. What, you don’t admit that there are such fantasticpeople among the peasants? Lots of them. The elder now has beguninfluencing him, especially since he tried to hang himself. But he’llcome and tell me all himself. You think he’ll hold out? Wait a bit,he’ll take his words back. I am waiting from hour to hour for him tocome and abjure his evidence. I have come to like that Nikolay and amstudying him in detail. And what do you think? He-he! He answered mevery plausibly on some points, he obviously had collected some evidenceand prepared himself cleverly. But on other points he is simply at sea,knows nothing and doesn’t even suspect that he doesn’t know!
“No, Rodion Romanovitch, Nikolay doesn’t come in! This is a fantastic,gloomy business, a modern case, an incident of to-day when the heartof man is troubled, when the phrase is quoted that blood ‘renews,’ whencomfort is preached as the aim of life. Here we have bookish dreams, aheart unhinged by theories. Here we see resolution in the first stage,but resolution of a special kind: he resolved to do it like jumping overa precipice or from a bell tower and his legs shook as he went to thecrime. He forgot to shut the door after him, and murdered two people fora theory. He committed the murder and couldn’t take the money, and whathe did manage to snatch up he hid under a stone. It wasn’t enough forhim to suffer agony behind the door while they battered at the door andrung the bell, no, he had to go to the empty lodging, half delirious, torecall the bell-ringing, he wanted to feel the cold shiver over again....Well, that we grant, was through illness, but consider this: he isa murderer, but looks upon himself as an honest man, despises others,poses as injured innocence. No, that’s not the work of a Nikolay, mydear Rodion Romanovitch!”
All that had been said before had sounded so like a recantation thatthese words were too great a shock. Raskolnikov shuddered as though hehad been stabbed.
“Then... who then... is the murderer?” he asked in a breathless voice,unable to restrain himself.
Porfiry Petrovitch sank back in his chair, as though he were amazed atthe question.
“Who is the murderer?” he repeated, as though unable to believe hisears. “Why, _you_, Rodion Romanovitch! You are the murderer,” he added,almost in a whisper, in a voice of genuine conviction.
Raskolnikov leapt from the sofa, stood up for a few seconds and sat downagain without uttering a word. His face twitched convulsively.
“Your lip is twitching just as it did before,” Porfiry Petrovitchobserved almost sympathetically. “You’ve been misunderstanding me, Ithink, Rodion Romanovitch,” he added after a brief pause, “that’s whyyou are so surprised. I came on purpose to tell you everything and dealopenly with you.”
“It was not I murdered her,” Raskolnikov whispered like a frightenedchild caught in the act.
“No, it was you, you Rodion Romanovitch, and no one else,” Porfirywhispered sternly, with conviction.
They were both silent and the silence lasted strangely long, about tenminutes. Raskolnikov put his elbow on the table and passed his fingersthrough his hair. Porfiry Petrovitch sat quietly waiting. SuddenlyRaskolnikov looked scornfully at Porfiry.
“You are at your old tricks again, Porfiry Petrovitch! Your old methodagain. I wonder you don’t get sick of it!”
“Oh, stop that, what does that matter now? It would be a differentmatter if there were witnesses present, but we are whispering alone. Yousee yourself that I have not come to chase and capture you like a hare.Whether you confess it or not is nothing to me now; for myself, I amconvinced without it.”
“If so, what did you come for?” Raskolnikov asked irritably. “I ask youthe same question again: if you consider me guilty, why don’t you takeme to prison?”
“Oh, that’s your question! I will answer you, point for point. In thefirst place, to arrest you so directly is not to my interest.”
“How so? If you are convinced you ought....”
“Ach, what if I am convinced? That’s only my dream for the time. Whyshould I put you in safety? You know that’s it, since you ask me to doit. If I confront you with that workman for instance and you say to him‘were you drunk or not? Who saw me with you? I simply took you to bedrunk, and you were drunk, too.’ Well, what could I answer, especiallyas your story is a more likely one than his? for there’s nothing butpsychology to support his evidence--that’s almost unseemly with his uglymug, while you hit the mark exactly, for the rascal is an inveteratedrunkard and notoriously so. And I have myself admitted candidly severaltimes already that that psychology can be taken in two ways and that thesecond way is stronger and looks far more probable, and that apart fromthat I have as yet nothing against you. And though I shall put you inprison and indeed have come--quite contrary to etiquette--to inform youof it beforehand, yet I tell you frankly, also contrary to etiquette,that it won’t be to my advantage. Well, secondly, I’ve come to youbecause...”
“Yes, yes, secondly?” Raskolnikov was listening breathless.
“Because, as I told you just now, I consider I owe you an explanation. Idon’t want you to look upon me as a monster, as I have a genuine likingfor you, you may believe me or not. And in the third place I’ve come toyou with a direct and open proposition--that you should surrenderand confess. It will be infinitely more to your advantage and to myadvantage too, for my task will be done. Well, is this open on my partor not?”
Raskolnikov thought a minute.
“Listen, Porfiry Petrovitch. You said just now you have nothing butpsychology to go on, yet now you’ve gone on mathematics. Well, what ifyou are mistaken yourself, now?”
“No, Rodion Romanovitch, I am not mistaken. I have a little fact eventhen, Providence sent it me.”
“What little fact?”
“I won’t tell you what, Rodion Romanovitch. And in any case, I haven’tthe right to put it off any longer, I must arrest you. So think it over:it makes no difference to me _now_ and so I speak only for your sake.Believe me, it will be better, Rodion Romanovitch.”
Raskolnikov smiled malignantly.
“That’s not simply ridiculous, it’s positively shameless. Why, even if Iwere guilty, which I don’t admit, what reason should I have to confess,when you tell me yourself that I shall be in greater safety in prison?”
“Ah, Rodion Romanovitch, don’t put too much faith in words, perhapsprison will not be altogether a restful place. That’s only theory andmy theory, and what authority am I for you? Perhaps, too, even now I amhiding something from you? I can’t lay bare everything, he-he! And howcan you ask what advantage? Don’t you know how it would lessen yoursentence? You would be confessing at a moment when another man has takenthe crime on himself and so has muddled the whole case. Consider that! Iswear before God that I will so arrange that your confession shallcome as a complete surprise. We will make a clean sweep of all thesepsychological points, of a suspicion against you, so that your crimewill appear to have been something like an aberration, for in truth itwas an aberration. I am an honest man, Rodion Romanovitch, and will keepmy word.”
Raskolnikov maintained a mournful silence and let his head sinkdejectedly. He pondered a long while and at last smiled again, but hissmile was sad and gentle.
“No!” he said, apparently abandoning all attempt to keep up appearanceswith Porfiry, “it’s not worth it, I don’t care about lessening thesentence!”
“That’s just what I was afraid of!” Porfiry cried warmly and, as itseemed, involuntarily. “That’s just what I feared, that you wouldn’tcare about the mitigation of sentence.”
Raskolnikov looked sadly and expressively at him.
“Ah, don’t disdain life!” Porfiry went on. “You have a great deal ofit still before you. How can you say you don’t want a mitigation ofsentence? You are an impatient fellow!”
“A great deal of what lies before me?”
“Of life. What sort of prophet are you, do you know much about it? Seekand ye shall find. This may be God’s means for bringing you to Him. Andit’s not for ever, the bondage....”
“The time will be shortened,” laughed Raskolnikov.
“Why, is it the bourgeois disgrace you are afraid of? It may be that youare afraid of it without knowing it, because you are young! But anyway_you_ shouldn’t be afraid of giving yourself up and confessing.”
“Ach, hang it!” Raskolnikov whispered with loathing and contempt, asthough he did not want to speak aloud.
He got up again as though he meant to go away, but sat down again inevident despair.
“Hang it, if you like! You’ve lost faith and you think that I amgrossly flattering you; but how long has your life been? How much doyou understand? You made up a theory and then were ashamed that it brokedown and turned out to be not at all original! It turned out somethingbase, that’s true, but you are not hopelessly base. By no means so base!At least you didn’t deceive yourself for long, you went straight to thefurthest point at one bound. How do I regard you? I regard you as oneof those men who would stand and smile at their torturer while he cutstheir entrails out, if only they have found faith or God. Find it andyou will live. You have long needed a change of air. Suffering, too,is a good thing. Suffer! Maybe Nikolay is right in wanting to suffer.I know you don’t believe in it--but don’t be over-wise; fling yourselfstraight into life, without deliberation; don’t be afraid--the floodwill bear you to the bank and set you safe on your feet again. Whatbank? How can I tell? I only believe that you have long life beforeyou. I know that you take all my words now for a set speech preparedbeforehand, but maybe you will remember them after. They may be of usesome time. That’s why I speak. It’s as well that you only killed theold woman. If you’d invented another theory you might perhaps havedone something a thousand times more hideous. You ought to thank God,perhaps. How do you know? Perhaps God is saving you for something.But keep a good heart and have less fear! Are you afraid of the greatexpiation before you? No, it would be shameful to be afraid of it. Sinceyou have taken such a step, you must harden your heart. There is justicein it. You must fulfil the demands of justice. I know that you don’tbelieve it, but indeed, life will bring you through. You will live itdown in time. What you need now is fresh air, fresh air, fresh air!”
Raskolnikov positively started.
“But who are you? what prophet are you? From the height of what majesticcalm do you proclaim these words of wisdom?”
“Who am I? I am a man with nothing to hope for, that’s all. A manperhaps of feeling and sympathy, maybe of some knowledge too, but my dayis over. But you are a different matter, there is life waiting for you.Though, who knows? maybe your life, too, will pass off in smoke and cometo nothing. Come, what does it matter, that you will pass into anotherclass of men? It’s not comfort you regret, with your heart! What ofit that perhaps no one will see you for so long? It’s not time, butyourself that will decide that. Be the sun and all will see you. Thesun has before all to be the sun. Why are you smiling again? At my beingsuch a Schiller? I bet you’re imagining that I am trying to get roundyou by flattery. Well, perhaps I am, he-he-he! Perhaps you’d better notbelieve my word, perhaps you’d better never believe it altogether--I’mmade that way, I confess it. But let me add, you can judge for yourself,I think, how far I am a base sort of man and how far I am honest.”
“When do you mean to arrest me?”
“Well, I can let you walk about another day or two. Think it over, mydear fellow, and pray to God. It’s more in your interest, believe me.”
“And what if I run away?” asked Raskolnikov with a strange smile.
“No, you won’t run away. A peasant would run away, a fashionabledissenter would run away, the flunkey of another man’s thought, foryou’ve only to show him the end of your little finger and he’ll be readyto believe in anything for the rest of his life. But you’ve ceased tobelieve in your theory already, what will you run away with? And whatwould you do in hiding? It would be hateful and difficult for you, andwhat you need more than anything in life is a definite position, anatmosphere to suit you. And what sort of atmosphere would you have? Ifyou ran away, you’d come back to yourself. _You can’t get on withoutus._ And if I put you in prison--say you’ve been there a month, or two,or three--remember my word, you’ll confess of yourself and perhaps toyour own surprise. You won’t know an hour beforehand that you are comingwith a confession. I am convinced that you will decide, ‘to take yoursuffering.’ You don’t believe my words now, but you’ll come to it ofyourself. For suffering, Rodion Romanovitch, is a great thing. Nevermind my having grown fat, I know all the same. Don’t laugh at it,there’s an idea in suffering, Nikolay is right. No, you won’t run away,Rodion Romanovitch.”
Raskolnikov got up and took his cap. Porfiry Petrovitch also rose.
“Are you going for a walk? The evening will be fine, if only we don’thave a storm. Though it would be a good thing to freshen the air.”
He, too, took his cap.
“Porfiry Petrovitch, please don’t take up the notion that I haveconfessed to you to-day,” Raskolnikov pronounced with sullen insistence.“You’re a strange man and I have listened to you from simple curiosity.But I have admitted nothing, remember that!”
“Oh, I know that, I’ll remember. Look at him, he’s trembling! Don’tbe uneasy, my dear fellow, have it your own way. Walk about a bit, youwon’t be able to walk too far. If anything happens, I have one requestto make of you,” he added, dropping his voice. “It’s an awkward one, butimportant. If anything were to happen (though indeed I don’t believein it and think you quite incapable of it), yet in case you were takenduring these forty or fifty hours with the notion of putting an end tothe business in some other way, in some fantastic fashion--laying handson yourself--(it’s an absurd proposition, but you must forgive me forit) do leave a brief but precise note, only two lines, and mention thestone. It will be more generous. Come, till we meet! Good thoughts andsound decisions to you!”
Porfiry went out, stooping and avoiding looking at Raskolnikov. Thelatter went to the window and waited with irritable impatience till hecalculated that Porfiry had reached the street and moved away. Then hetoo went hurriedly out of the room.
CHAPTER III
He hurried to Svidrigaïlov’s. What he had to hope from that man hedid not know. But that man had some hidden power over him. Having oncerecognised this, he could not rest, and now the time had come.
On the way, one question particularly worried him: had Svidrigaïlov beento Porfiry’s?
As far as he could judge, he would swear to it, that he had not. Hepondered again and again, went over Porfiry’s visit; no, he hadn’t been,of course he hadn’t.
But if he had not been yet, would he go? Meanwhile, for the present hefancied he couldn’t. Why? He could not have explained, but if he could,he would not have wasted much thought over it at the moment. It allworried him and at the same time he could not attend to it. Strange tosay, none would have believed it perhaps, but he only felt a faint vagueanxiety about his immediate future. Another, much more important anxietytormented him--it concerned himself, but in a different, more vital way.Moreover, he was conscious of immense moral fatigue, though his mind wasworking better that morning than it had done of late.
And was it worth while, after all that had happened, to contend withthese new trivial difficulties? Was it worth while, for instance, tomanoeuvre that Svidrigaïlov should not go to Porfiry’s? Was it worthwhile to investigate, to ascertain the facts, to waste time over anyonelike Svidrigaïlov?
Oh, how sick he was of it all!
And yet he was hastening to Svidrigaïlov; could he be expectingsomething _new_ from him, information, or means of escape? Men willcatch at straws! Was it destiny or some instinct bringing them together?Perhaps it was only fatigue, despair; perhaps it was not Svidrigaïlovbut some other whom he needed, and Svidrigaïlov had simply presentedhimself by chance. Sonia? But what should he go to Sonia for now? To begher tears again? He was afraid of Sonia, too. Sonia stood before him asan irrevocable sentence. He must go his own way or hers. At that momentespecially he did not feel equal to seeing her. No, would it not bebetter to try Svidrigaïlov? And he could not help inwardly owning thathe had long felt that he must see him for some reason.
But what could they have in common? Their very evil-doing could notbe of the same kind. The man, moreover, was very unpleasant, evidentlydepraved, undoubtedly cunning and deceitful, possibly malignant. Suchstories were told about him. It is true he was befriending KaterinaIvanovna’s children, but who could tell with what motive and what itmeant? The man always had some design, some project.
There was another thought which had been continually hovering of lateabout Raskolnikov’s mind, and causing him great uneasiness. It was sopainful that he made distinct efforts to get rid of it. He sometimesthought that Svidrigaïlov was dogging his footsteps. Svidrigaïlov hadfound out his secret and had had designs on Dounia. What if he had themstill? Wasn’t it practically certain that he had? And what if, havinglearnt his secret and so having gained power over him, he were to use itas a weapon against Dounia?
This idea sometimes even tormented his dreams, but it had neverpresented itself so vividly to him as on his way to Svidrigaïlov.The very thought moved him to gloomy rage. To begin with, this wouldtransform everything, even his own position; he would have at once toconfess his secret to Dounia. Would he have to give himself up perhapsto prevent Dounia from taking some rash step? The letter? This morningDounia had received a letter. From whom could she get letters inPetersburg? Luzhin, perhaps? It’s true Razumihin was there to protecther, but Razumihin knew nothing of the position. Perhaps it was his dutyto tell Razumihin? He thought of it with repugnance.
In any case he must see Svidrigaïlov as soon as possible, he decidedfinally. Thank God, the details of the interview were of littleconsequence, if only he could get at the root of the matter; butif Svidrigaïlov were capable... if he were intriguing againstDounia--then...
Raskolnikov was so exhausted by what he had passed through that monththat he could only decide such questions in one way; “then I shall killhim,” he thought in cold despair.
A sudden anguish oppressed his heart, he stood still in the middle ofthe street and began looking about to see where he was and which way hewas going. He found himself in X. Prospect, thirty or forty paces fromthe Hay Market, through which he had come. The whole second storey ofthe house on the left was used as a tavern. All the windows were wideopen; judging from the figures moving at the windows, the rooms werefull to overflowing. There were sounds of singing, of clarionet andviolin, and the boom of a Turkish drum. He could hear women shrieking.He was about to turn back wondering why he had come to the X. Prospect,when suddenly at one of the end windows he saw Svidrigaïlov, sittingat a tea-table right in the open window with a pipe in his mouth.Raskolnikov was dreadfully taken aback, almost terrified. Svidrigaïlovwas silently watching and scrutinising him and, what struck Raskolnikovat once, seemed to be meaning to get up and slip away unobserved.Raskolnikov at once pretended not to have seen him, but to be lookingabsent-mindedly away, while he watched him out of the corner of his eye.His heart was beating violently. Yet, it was evident that Svidrigaïlovdid not want to be seen. He took the pipe out of his mouth and was onthe point of concealing himself, but as he got up and moved back hischair, he seemed to have become suddenly aware that Raskolnikov had seenhim, and was watching him. What had passed between them was much thesame as what happened at their first meeting in Raskolnikov’s room. Asly smile came into Svidrigaïlov’s face and grew broader andbroader. Each knew that he was seen and watched by the other. At lastSvidrigaïlov broke into a loud laugh.
“Well, well, come in if you want me; I am here!” he shouted from thewindow.
Raskolnikov went up into the tavern. He found Svidrigaïlov in a tinyback room, adjoining the saloon in which merchants, clerks and numbersof people of all sorts were drinking tea at twenty little tables to thedesperate bawling of a chorus of singers. The click of billiard ballscould be heard in the distance. On the table before Svidrigaïlov stoodan open bottle and a glass half full of champagne. In the room he foundalso a boy with a little hand organ, a healthy-looking red-cheeked girlof eighteen, wearing a tucked-up striped skirt, and a Tyrolese hat withribbons. In spite of the chorus in the other room, she was singing someservants’ hall song in a rather husky contralto, to the accompaniment ofthe organ.
“Come, that’s enough,” Svidrigaïlov stopped her at Raskolnikov’sentrance. The girl at once broke off and stood waiting respectfully.She had sung her guttural rhymes, too, with a serious and respectfulexpression in her face.
“Hey, Philip, a glass!” shouted Svidrigaïlov.
“I won’t drink anything,” said Raskolnikov.
“As you like, I didn’t mean it for you. Drink, Katia! I don’t wantanything more to-day, you can go.” He poured her out a full glass, andlaid down a yellow note.
Katia drank off her glass of wine, as women do, without putting it down,in twenty gulps, took the note and kissed Svidrigaïlov’s hand, which heallowed quite seriously. She went out of the room and the boy trailedafter her with the organ. Both had been brought in from the street.Svidrigaïlov had not been a week in Petersburg, but everything about himwas already, so to speak, on a patriarchal footing; the waiter, Philip,was by now an old friend and very obsequious.
The door leading to the saloon had a lock on it. Svidrigaïlov was athome in this room and perhaps spent whole days in it. The tavern wasdirty and wretched, not even second-rate.
“I was going to see you and looking for you,” Raskolnikov began, “butI don’t know what made me turn from the Hay Market into the X. Prospectjust now. I never take this turning. I turn to the right from the HayMarket. And this isn’t the way to you. I simply turned and here you are.It is strange!”
“Why don’t you say at once ‘it’s a miracle’?”
“Because it may be only chance.”
“Oh, that’s the way with all you folk,” laughed Svidrigaïlov. “You won’tadmit it, even if you do inwardly believe it a miracle! Here you saythat it may be only chance. And what cowards they all are here, abouthaving an opinion of their own, you can’t fancy, Rodion Romanovitch. Idon’t mean you, you have an opinion of your own and are not afraid tohave it. That’s how it was you attracted my curiosity.”
“Nothing else?”
“Well, that’s enough, you know,” Svidrigaïlov was obviously exhilarated,but only slightly so, he had not had more than half a glass of wine.
“I fancy you came to see me before you knew that I was capable of havingwhat you call an opinion of my own,” observed Raskolnikov.
“Oh, well, it was a different matter. Everyone has his own plans. Andapropos of the miracle let me tell you that I think you have been asleepfor the last two or three days. I told you of this tavern myself, thereis no miracle in your coming straight here. I explained the way myself,told you where it was, and the hours you could find me here. Do youremember?”
“I don’t remember,” answered Raskolnikov with surprise.
“I believe you. I told you twice. The address has been stampedmechanically on your memory. You turned this way mechanically and yetprecisely according to the direction, though you are not aware ofit. When I told you then, I hardly hoped you understood me. You giveyourself away too much, Rodion Romanovitch. And another thing, I’mconvinced there are lots of people in Petersburg who talk to themselvesas they walk. This is a town of crazy people. If only we had scientificmen, doctors, lawyers and philosophers might make most valuableinvestigations in Petersburg each in his own line. There are few placeswhere there are so many gloomy, strong and queer influences on the soulof man as in Petersburg. The mere influences of climate mean so much.And it’s the administrative centre of all Russia and its character mustbe reflected on the whole country. But that is neither here nor therenow. The point is that I have several times watched you. You walk outof your house--holding your head high--twenty paces from home you let itsink, and fold your hands behind your back. You look and evidently seenothing before nor beside you. At last you begin moving your lips andtalking to yourself, and sometimes you wave one hand and declaim, and atlast stand still in the middle of the road. That’s not at all the thing.Someone may be watching you besides me, and it won’t do you any good.It’s nothing really to do with me and I can’t cure you, but, of course,you understand me.”
“Do you know that I am being followed?” asked Raskolnikov, lookinginquisitively at him.
“No, I know nothing about it,” said Svidrigaïlov, seeming surprised.
“Well, then, let us leave me alone,” Raskolnikov muttered, frowning.
“Very good, let us leave you alone.”
“You had better tell me, if you come here to drink, and directed metwice to come here to you, why did you hide, and try to get away justnow when I looked at the window from the street? I saw it.”
“He-he! And why was it you lay on your sofa with closed eyes andpretended to be asleep, though you were wide awake while I stood in yourdoorway? I saw it.”
“I may have had... reasons. You know that yourself.”
“And I may have had my reasons, though you don’t know them.”
Raskolnikov dropped his right elbow on the table, leaned his chin in thefingers of his right hand, and stared intently at Svidrigaïlov. For afull minute he scrutinised his face, which had impressed him before. Itwas a strange face, like a mask; white and red, with bright red lips,with a flaxen beard, and still thick flaxen hair. His eyes were somehowtoo blue and their expression somehow too heavy and fixed. There wassomething awfully unpleasant in that handsome face, which looked sowonderfully young for his age. Svidrigaïlov was smartly dressed in lightsummer clothes and was particularly dainty in his linen. He wore a hugering with a precious stone in it.
“Have I got to bother myself about you, too, now?” said Raskolnikovsuddenly, coming with nervous impatience straight to the point. “Eventhough perhaps you are the most dangerous man if you care to injure me,I don’t want to put myself out any more. I will show you at once that Idon’t prize myself as you probably think I do. I’ve come to tell you atonce that if you keep to your former intentions with regard to my sisterand if you think to derive any benefit in that direction from what hasbeen discovered of late, I will kill you before you get me locked up.You can reckon on my word. You know that I can keep it. And in thesecond place if you want to tell me anything--for I keep fancying allthis time that you have something to tell me--make haste and tell it,for time is precious and very likely it will soon be too late.”
“Why in such haste?” asked Svidrigaïlov, looking at him curiously.
“Everyone has his plans,” Raskolnikov answered gloomily and impatiently.
“You urged me yourself to frankness just now, and at the first questionyou refuse to answer,” Svidrigaïlov observed with a smile. “Youkeep fancying that I have aims of my own and so you look at me withsuspicion. Of course it’s perfectly natural in your position. Butthough I should like to be friends with you, I shan’t trouble myselfto convince you of the contrary. The game isn’t worth the candle and Iwasn’t intending to talk to you about anything special.”
“What did you want me, for, then? It was you who came hanging about me.”
“Why, simply as an interesting subject for observation. I liked thefantastic nature of your position--that’s what it was! Besides you arethe brother of a person who greatly interested me, and from that personI had in the past heard a very great deal about you, from which Igathered that you had a great influence over her; isn’t that enough?Ha-ha-ha! Still I must admit that your question is rather complex, andis difficult for me to answer. Here, you, for instance, have come to menot only for a definite object, but for the sake of hearing somethingnew. Isn’t that so? Isn’t that so?” persisted Svidrigaïlov with a slysmile. “Well, can’t you fancy then that I, too, on my way here in thetrain was reckoning on you, on your telling me something new, and on mymaking some profit out of you! You see what rich men we are!”
“What profit could you make?”
“How can I tell you? How do I know? You see in what a tavern I spend allmy time and it’s my enjoyment, that’s to say it’s no great enjoyment,but one must sit somewhere; that poor Katia now--you saw her?... If onlyI had been a glutton now, a club gourmand, but you see I can eat this.”
He pointed to a little table in the corner where the remnants of aterrible-looking beef-steak and potatoes lay on a tin dish.
“Have you dined, by the way? I’ve had something and want nothing more.I don’t drink, for instance, at all. Except for champagne I never touchanything, and not more than a glass of that all the evening, and eventhat is enough to make my head ache. I ordered it just now to windmyself up, for I am just going off somewhere and you see me in apeculiar state of mind. That was why I hid myself just now like aschoolboy, for I was afraid you would hinder me. But I believe,” hepulled out his watch, “I can spend an hour with you. It’s half-pastfour now. If only I’d been something, a landowner, a father, a cavalryofficer, a photographer, a journalist... I am nothing, no specialty,and sometimes I am positively bored. I really thought you would tell mesomething new.”
“But what are you, and why have you come here?”
“What am I? You know, a gentleman, I served for two years in thecavalry, then I knocked about here in Petersburg, then I married MarfaPetrovna and lived in the country. There you have my biography!”
“You are a gambler, I believe?”
“No, a poor sort of gambler. A card-sharper--not a gambler.”
“You have been a card-sharper then?”
“Yes, I’ve been a card-sharper too.”
“Didn’t you get thrashed sometimes?”
“It did happen. Why?”
“Why, you might have challenged them... altogether it must have beenlively.”
“I won’t contradict you, and besides I am no hand at philosophy. Iconfess that I hastened here for the sake of the women.”
“As soon as you buried Marfa Petrovna?”
“Quite so,” Svidrigaïlov smiled with engaging candour. “What of it? Youseem to find something wrong in my speaking like that about women?”
“You ask whether I find anything wrong in vice?”
“Vice! Oh, that’s what you are after! But I’ll answer you in order,first about women in general; you know I am fond of talking. Tell me,what should I restrain myself for? Why should I give up women, since Ihave a passion for them? It’s an occupation, anyway.”
“So you hope for nothing here but vice?”
“Oh, very well, for vice then. You insist on its being vice. But anywayI like a direct question. In this vice at least there is somethingpermanent, founded indeed upon nature and not dependent on fantasy,something present in the blood like an ever-burning ember, for eversetting one on fire and, maybe, not to be quickly extinguished, evenwith years. You’ll agree it’s an occupation of a sort.”
“That’s nothing to rejoice at, it’s a disease and a dangerous one.”
“Oh, that’s what you think, is it! I agree, that it is a disease likeeverything that exceeds moderation. And, of course, in this one mustexceed moderation. But in the first place, everybody does so in one wayor another, and in the second place, of course, one ought to be moderateand prudent, however mean it may be, but what am I to do? If I hadn’tthis, I might have to shoot myself. I am ready to admit that a decentman ought to put up with being bored, but yet...”
“And could you shoot yourself?”
“Oh, come!” Svidrigaïlov parried with disgust. “Please don’t speak ofit,” he added hurriedly and with none of the bragging tone he had shownin all the previous conversation. His face quite changed. “I admit it’san unpardonable weakness, but I can’t help it. I am afraid of death andI dislike its being talked of. Do you know that I am to a certain extenta mystic?”
“Ah, the apparitions of Marfa Petrovna! Do they still go on visitingyou?”
“Oh, don’t talk of them; there have been no more in Petersburg, confoundthem!” he cried with an air of irritation. “Let’s rather talk of that...though... H’m! I have not much time, and can’t stay long with you,it’s a pity! I should have found plenty to tell you.”
“What’s your engagement, a woman?”
“Yes, a woman, a casual incident.... No, that’s not what I want to talkof.”
“And the hideousness, the filthiness of all your surroundings, doesn’tthat affect you? Have you lost the strength to stop yourself?”
“And do you pretend to strength, too? He-he-he! You surprised me justnow, Rodion Romanovitch, though I knew beforehand it would be so.You preach to me about vice and æsthetics! You--a Schiller, you--anidealist! Of course that’s all as it should be and it would besurprising if it were not so, yet it is strange in reality.... Ah,what a pity I have no time, for you’re a most interesting type! And,by-the-way, are you fond of Schiller? I am awfully fond of him.”
“But what a braggart you are,” Raskolnikov said with some disgust.
“Upon my word, I am not,” answered Svidrigaïlov laughing. “However, Iwon’t dispute it, let me be a braggart, why not brag, if it hurts noone? I spent seven years in the country with Marfa Petrovna, so now whenI come across an intelligent person like you--intelligent and highlyinteresting--I am simply glad to talk and, besides, I’ve drunk thathalf-glass of champagne and it’s gone to my head a little. And besides,there’s a certain fact that has wound me up tremendously, but about thatI... will keep quiet. Where are you off to?” he asked in alarm.
Raskolnikov had begun getting up. He felt oppressed and stifled and,as it were, ill at ease at having come here. He felt convinced thatSvidrigaïlov was the most worthless scoundrel on the face of the earth.
“A-ach! Sit down, stay a little!” Svidrigaïlov begged. “Let them bringyou some tea, anyway. Stay a little, I won’t talk nonsense, aboutmyself, I mean. I’ll tell you something. If you like I’ll tell you how awoman tried ‘to save’ me, as you would call it? It will be an answer toyour first question indeed, for the woman was your sister. May I tellyou? It will help to spend the time.”
“Tell me, but I trust that you...”
“Oh, don’t be uneasy. Besides, even in a worthless low fellow like me,Avdotya Romanovna can only excite the deepest respect.”
CHAPTER IV
“You know perhaps--yes, I told you myself,” began Svidrigaïlov, “thatI was in the debtors’ prison here, for an immense sum, and had notany expectation of being able to pay it. There’s no need to go intoparticulars how Marfa Petrovna bought me out; do you know to what apoint of insanity a woman can sometimes love? She was an honest woman,and very sensible, although completely uneducated. Would you believethat this honest and jealous woman, after many scenes of hysterics andreproaches, condescended to enter into a kind of contract with me whichshe kept throughout our married life? She was considerably older thanI, and besides, she always kept a clove or something in her mouth. Therewas so much swinishness in my soul and honesty too, of a sort, as totell her straight out that I couldn’t be absolutely faithful to her.This confession drove her to frenzy, but yet she seems in a way to haveliked my brutal frankness. She thought it showed I was unwilling todeceive her if I warned her like this beforehand and for a jealouswoman, you know, that’s the first consideration. After many tears anunwritten contract was drawn up between us: first, that I would neverleave Marfa Petrovna and would always be her husband; secondly, that Iwould never absent myself without her permission; thirdly, that I wouldnever set up a permanent mistress; fourthly, in return for this, MarfaPetrovna gave me a free hand with the maidservants, but only with hersecret knowledge; fifthly, God forbid my falling in love with a woman ofour class; sixthly, in case I--which God forbid--should be visited bya great serious passion I was bound to reveal it to Marfa Petrovna. Onthis last score, however, Marfa Petrovna was fairly at ease. She was asensible woman and so she could not help looking upon me as a dissoluteprofligate incapable of real love. But a sensible woman and a jealouswoman are two very different things, and that’s where the troublecame in. But to judge some people impartially we must renounce certainpreconceived opinions and our habitual attitude to the ordinary peopleabout us. I have reason to have faith in your judgment rather thanin anyone’s. Perhaps you have already heard a great deal that wasridiculous and absurd about Marfa Petrovna. She certainly had some veryridiculous ways, but I tell you frankly that I feel really sorry for theinnumerable woes of which I was the cause. Well, and that’s enough, Ithink, by way of a decorous _oraison funèbre_ for the most tender wifeof a most tender husband. When we quarrelled, I usually held my tongueand did not irritate her and that gentlemanly conduct rarely failed toattain its object, it influenced her, it pleased her, indeed. These weretimes when she was positively proud of me. But your sister she couldn’tput up with, anyway. And however she came to risk taking such abeautiful creature into her house as a governess. My explanation is thatMarfa Petrovna was an ardent and impressionable woman and simply fellin love herself--literally fell in love--with your sister. Well, littlewonder--look at Avdotya Romanovna! I saw the danger at the first glanceand what do you think, I resolved not to look at her even. But AvdotyaRomanovna herself made the first step, would you believe it? Would youbelieve it too that Marfa Petrovna was positively angry with me at firstfor my persistent silence about your sister, for my careless receptionof her continual adoring praises of Avdotya Romanovna. I don’t knowwhat it was she wanted! Well, of course, Marfa Petrovna told AvdotyaRomanovna every detail about me. She had the unfortunate habit oftelling literally everyone all our family secrets and continuallycomplaining of me; how could she fail to confide in such a delightfulnew friend? I expect they talked of nothing else but me and no doubtAvdotya Romanovna heard all those dark mysterious rumours that werecurrent about me.... I don’t mind betting that you too have heardsomething of the sort already?”
“I have. Luzhin charged you with having caused the death of a child. Isthat true?”
“Don’t refer to those vulgar tales, I beg,” said Svidrigaïlov withdisgust and annoyance. “If you insist on wanting to know about all thatidiocy, I will tell you one day, but now...”
“I was told too about some footman of yours in the country whom youtreated badly.”
“I beg you to drop the subject,” Svidrigaïlov interrupted again withobvious impatience.
“Was that the footman who came to you after death to fill your pipe?...you told me about it yourself.” Raskolnikov felt more and moreirritated.
Svidrigaïlov looked at him attentively and Raskolnikov fancied he caughta flash of spiteful mockery in that look. But Svidrigaïlov restrainedhimself and answered very civilly:
“Yes, it was. I see that you, too, are extremely interested and shallfeel it my duty to satisfy your curiosity at the first opportunity. Uponmy soul! I see that I really might pass for a romantic figure withsome people. Judge how grateful I must be to Marfa Petrovna for havingrepeated to Avdotya Romanovna such mysterious and interesting gossipabout me. I dare not guess what impression it made on her, but in anycase it worked in my interests. With all Avdotya Romanovna’s naturalaversion and in spite of my invariably gloomy and repellent aspect--shedid at least feel pity for me, pity for a lost soul. And if once agirl’s heart is moved to _pity_, it’s more dangerous than anything. Sheis bound to want to ‘save him,’ to bring him to his senses, and lifthim up and draw him to nobler aims, and restore him to new life andusefulness--well, we all know how far such dreams can go. I saw at oncethat the bird was flying into the cage of herself. And I too made ready.I think you are frowning, Rodion Romanovitch? There’s no need. As youknow, it all ended in smoke. (Hang it all, what a lot I am drinking!)Do you know, I always, from the very beginning, regretted that it wasn’tyour sister’s fate to be born in the second or third century A.D., asthe daughter of a reigning prince or some governor or pro-consul in AsiaMinor. She would undoubtedly have been one of those who would enduremartyrdom and would have smiled when they branded her bosom with hotpincers. And she would have gone to it of herself. And in the fourth orfifth century she would have walked away into the Egyptian desert andwould have stayed there thirty years living on roots and ecstasies andvisions. She is simply thirsting to face some torture for someone, andif she can’t get her torture, she’ll throw herself out of a window. I’veheard something of a Mr. Razumihin--he’s said to be a sensible fellow;his surname suggests it, indeed. He’s probably a divinity student. Well,he’d better look after your sister! I believe I understand her, and I amproud of it. But at the beginning of an acquaintance, as you know, oneis apt to be more heedless and stupid. One doesn’t see clearly. Hang itall, why is she so handsome? It’s not my fault. In fact, it began onmy side with a most irresistible physical desire. Avdotya Romanovna isawfully chaste, incredibly and phenomenally so. Take note, I tell youthis about your sister as a fact. She is almost morbidly chaste, inspite of her broad intelligence, and it will stand in her way. Therehappened to be a girl in the house then, Parasha, a black-eyedwench, whom I had never seen before--she had just come from anothervillage--very pretty, but incredibly stupid: she burst into tears,wailed so that she could be heard all over the place and caused scandal.One day after dinner Avdotya Romanovna followed me into an avenue inthe garden and with flashing eyes _insisted_ on my leaving poor Parashaalone. It was almost our first conversation by ourselves. I, of course,was only too pleased to obey her wishes, tried to appear disconcerted,embarrassed, in fact played my part not badly. Then came interviews,mysterious conversations, exhortations, entreaties, supplications, eventears--would you believe it, even tears? Think what the passion forpropaganda will bring some girls to! I, of course, threw it all onmy destiny, posed as hungering and thirsting for light, and finallyresorted to the most powerful weapon in the subjection of thefemale heart, a weapon which never fails one. It’s the well-knownresource--flattery. Nothing in the world is harder than speaking thetruth and nothing easier than flattery. If there’s the hundredth partof a false note in speaking the truth, it leads to a discord, and thatleads to trouble. But if all, to the last note, is false in flattery, itis just as agreeable, and is heard not without satisfaction. It may bea coarse satisfaction, but still a satisfaction. And however coarse theflattery, at least half will be sure to seem true. That’s so for allstages of development and classes of society. A vestal virgin might beseduced by flattery. I can never remember without laughter how I onceseduced a lady who was devoted to her husband, her children, and herprinciples. What fun it was and how little trouble! And the lady reallyhad principles--of her own, anyway. All my tactics lay in simply beingutterly annihilated and prostrate before her purity. I flattered hershamelessly, and as soon as I succeeded in getting a pressure ofthe hand, even a glance from her, I would reproach myself for havingsnatched it by force, and would declare that she had resisted, so thatI could never have gained anything but for my being so unprincipled.I maintained that she was so innocent that she could not foresee mytreachery, and yielded to me unconsciously, unawares, and so on. Infact, I triumphed, while my lady remained firmly convinced that she wasinnocent, chaste, and faithful to all her duties and obligations andhad succumbed quite by accident. And how angry she was with me when Iexplained to her at last that it was my sincere conviction that she wasjust as eager as I. Poor Marfa Petrovna was awfully weak on the side offlattery, and if I had only cared to, I might have had all her propertysettled on me during her lifetime. (I am drinking an awful lot of winenow and talking too much.) I hope you won’t be angry if I mention nowthat I was beginning to produce the same effect on Avdotya Romanovna.But I was stupid and impatient and spoiled it all. Avdotya Romanovna hadseveral times--and one time in particular--been greatly displeased bythe expression of my eyes, would you believe it? There was sometimes alight in them which frightened her and grew stronger and stronger andmore unguarded till it was hateful to her. No need to go into detail,but we parted. There I acted stupidly again. I fell to jeering in thecoarsest way at all such propaganda and efforts to convert me; Parashacame on to the scene again, and not she alone; in fact there was atremendous to-do. Ah, Rodion Romanovitch, if you could only see how yoursister’s eyes can flash sometimes! Never mind my being drunk at thismoment and having had a whole glass of wine. I am speaking the truth.I assure you that this glance has haunted my dreams; the very rustle ofher dress was more than I could stand at last. I really began to thinkthat I might become epileptic. I could never have believed that I couldbe moved to such a frenzy. It was essential, indeed, to be reconciled,but by then it was impossible. And imagine what I did then! To whata pitch of stupidity a man can be brought by frenzy! Never undertakeanything in a frenzy, Rodion Romanovitch. I reflected that AvdotyaRomanovna was after all a beggar (ach, excuse me, that’s not the word...but does it matter if it expresses the meaning?), that she lived byher work, that she had her mother and you to keep (ach, hang it, youare frowning again), and I resolved to offer her all my money--thirtythousand roubles I could have realised then--if she would run away withme here, to Petersburg. Of course I should have vowed eternal love,rapture, and so on. Do you know, I was so wild about her at that timethat if she had told me to poison Marfa Petrovna or to cut her throatand to marry herself, it would have been done at once! But it ended inthe catastrophe of which you know already. You can fancy how frantic Iwas when I heard that Marfa Petrovna had got hold of that scoundrellyattorney, Luzhin, and had almost made a match between them--which wouldreally have been just the same thing as I was proposing. Wouldn’t it?Wouldn’t it? I notice that you’ve begun to be very attentive... youinteresting young man....”
Svidrigaïlov struck the table with his fist impatiently. He was flushed.Raskolnikov saw clearly that the glass or glass and a half of champagnethat he had sipped almost unconsciously was affecting him--and heresolved to take advantage of the opportunity. He felt very suspiciousof Svidrigaïlov.
“Well, after what you have said, I am fully convinced that you havecome to Petersburg with designs on my sister,” he said directly toSvidrigaïlov, in order to irritate him further.
“Oh, nonsense,” said Svidrigaïlov, seeming to rouse himself. “Why, Itold you... besides your sister can’t endure me.”
“Yes, I am certain that she can’t, but that’s not the point.”
“Are you so sure that she can’t?” Svidrigaïlov screwed up his eyes andsmiled mockingly. “You are right, she doesn’t love me, but you cannever be sure of what has passed between husband and wife or lover andmistress. There’s always a little corner which remains a secret tothe world and is only known to those two. Will you answer for it thatAvdotya Romanovna regarded me with aversion?”
“From some words you’ve dropped, I notice that you still havedesigns--and of course evil ones--on Dounia and mean to carry them outpromptly.”
“What, have I dropped words like that?” Svidrigaïlov asked in naïvedismay, taking not the slightest notice of the epithet bestowed on hisdesigns.
“Why, you are dropping them even now. Why are you so frightened? Whatare you so afraid of now?”
“Me--afraid? Afraid of you? You have rather to be afraid of me, _cherami_. But what nonsense.... I’ve drunk too much though, I see that. Iwas almost saying too much again. Damn the wine! Hi! there, water!”
He snatched up the champagne bottle and flung it without ceremony out ofthe window. Philip brought the water.
“That’s all nonsense!” said Svidrigaïlov, wetting a towel and putting itto his head. “But I can answer you in one word and annihilate all yoursuspicions. Do you know that I am going to get married?”
“You told me so before.”
“Did I? I’ve forgotten. But I couldn’t have told you so for certain forI had not even seen my betrothed; I only meant to. But now I reallyhave a betrothed and it’s a settled thing, and if it weren’t that I havebusiness that can’t be put off, I would have taken you to see themat once, for I should like to ask your advice. Ach, hang it, only tenminutes left! See, look at the watch. But I must tell you, for it’s aninteresting story, my marriage, in its own way. Where are you off to?Going again?”
“No, I’m not going away now.”
“Not at all? We shall see. I’ll take you there, I’ll show you mybetrothed, only not now. For you’ll soon have to be off. You have to goto the right and I to the left. Do you know that Madame Resslich, thewoman I am lodging with now, eh? I know what you’re thinking, that she’sthe woman whose girl they say drowned herself in the winter. Come, areyou listening? She arranged it all for me. You’re bored, she said,you want something to fill up your time. For, you know, I am a gloomy,depressed person. Do you think I’m light-hearted? No, I’m gloomy. I dono harm, but sit in a corner without speaking a word for three days at atime. And that Resslich is a sly hussy, I tell you. I know what she hasgot in her mind; she thinks I shall get sick of it, abandon my wife anddepart, and she’ll get hold of her and make a profit out of her--in ourclass, of course, or higher. She told me the father was a broken-downretired official, who has been sitting in a chair for the last threeyears with his legs paralysed. The mamma, she said, was a sensiblewoman. There is a son serving in the provinces, but he doesn’t help;there is a daughter, who is married, but she doesn’t visit them. Andthey’ve two little nephews on their hands, as though their own childrenwere not enough, and they’ve taken from school their youngest daughter,a girl who’ll be sixteen in another month, so that then she can bemarried. She was for me. We went there. How funny it was! I presentmyself--a landowner, a widower, of a well-known name, with connections,with a fortune. What if I am fifty and she is not sixteen? Who thinksof that? But it’s fascinating, isn’t it? It is fascinating, ha-ha! Youshould have seen how I talked to the papa and mamma. It was worth payingto have seen me at that moment. She comes in, curtseys, you can fancy,still in a short frock--an unopened bud! Flushing like a sunset--she hadbeen told, no doubt. I don’t know how you feel about female faces, butto my mind these sixteen years, these childish eyes, shyness and tearsof bashfulness are better than beauty; and she is a perfect littlepicture, too. Fair hair in little curls, like a lamb’s, full little rosylips, tiny feet, a charmer!... Well, we made friends. I told them I wasin a hurry owing to domestic circumstances, and the next day, that isthe day before yesterday, we were betrothed. When I go now I take her onmy knee at once and keep her there.... Well, she flushes like a sunsetand I kiss her every minute. Her mamma of course impresses on her thatthis is her husband and that this must be so. It’s simply delicious! Thepresent betrothed condition is perhaps better than marriage. Here youhave what is called _la nature et la vérité_, ha-ha! I’ve talked to hertwice, she is far from a fool. Sometimes she steals a look at me thatpositively scorches me. Her face is like Raphael’s Madonna. You know,the Sistine Madonna’s face has something fantastic in it, the faceof mournful religious ecstasy. Haven’t you noticed it? Well, she’ssomething in that line. The day after we’d been betrothed, I bought herpresents to the value of fifteen hundred roubles--a set of diamonds andanother of pearls and a silver dressing-case as large as this, with allsorts of things in it, so that even my Madonna’s face glowed. I sat heron my knee, yesterday, and I suppose rather too unceremoniously--sheflushed crimson and the tears started, but she didn’t want to show it.We were left alone, she suddenly flung herself on my neck (for the firsttime of her own accord), put her little arms round me, kissed me, andvowed that she would be an obedient, faithful, and good wife, would makeme happy, would devote all her life, every minute of her life, wouldsacrifice everything, everything, and that all she asks in return ismy _respect_, and that she wants ‘nothing, nothing more from me, nopresents.’ You’ll admit that to hear such a confession, alone, from anangel of sixteen in a muslin frock, with little curls, with a flushof maiden shyness in her cheeks and tears of enthusiasm in her eyes israther fascinating! Isn’t it fascinating? It’s worth paying for, isn’tit? Well... listen, we’ll go to see my betrothed, only not just now!”
“The fact is this monstrous difference in age and development excitesyour sensuality! Will you really make such a marriage?”
“Why, of course. Everyone thinks of himself, and he lives most gaily whoknows best how to deceive himself. Ha-ha! But why are you so keen aboutvirtue? Have mercy on me, my good friend. I am a sinful man. Ha-ha-ha!”
“But you have provided for the children of Katerina Ivanovna. Though...though you had your own reasons.... I understand it all now.”
“I am always fond of children, very fond of them,” laughed Svidrigaïlov.“I can tell you one curious instance of it. The first day I came here Ivisited various haunts, after seven years I simply rushed at them. Youprobably notice that I am not in a hurry to renew acquaintance with myold friends. I shall do without them as long as I can. Do you know, whenI was with Marfa Petrovna in the country, I was haunted by the thoughtof these places where anyone who knows his way about can find a greatdeal. Yes, upon my soul! The peasants have vodka, the educated youngpeople, shut out from activity, waste themselves in impossible dreamsand visions and are crippled by theories; Jews have sprung up and areamassing money, and all the rest give themselves up to debauchery. Fromthe first hour the town reeked of its familiar odours. I chanced to bein a frightful den--I like my dens dirty--it was a dance, so called, andthere was a _cancan_ such as I never saw in my day. Yes, there youhave progress. All of a sudden I saw a little girl of thirteen, nicelydressed, dancing with a specialist in that line, with another one_vis-à-vis_. Her mother was sitting on a chair by the wall. You can’tfancy what a _cancan_ that was! The girl was ashamed, blushed, atlast felt insulted, and began to cry. Her partner seized her and beganwhirling her round and performing before her; everyone laughed and--Ilike your public, even the _cancan_ public--they laughed and shouted,‘Serves her right--serves her right! Shouldn’t bring children!’ Well,it’s not my business whether that consoling reflection was logical ornot. I at once fixed on my plan, sat down by the mother, and began bysaying that I too was a stranger and that people here were ill-bred andthat they couldn’t distinguish decent folks and treat them with respect,gave her to understand that I had plenty of money, offered to take themhome in my carriage. I took them home and got to know them. They werelodging in a miserable little hole and had only just arrived from thecountry. She told me that she and her daughter could only regard myacquaintance as an honour. I found out that they had nothing of theirown and had come to town upon some legal business. I proffered myservices and money. I learnt that they had gone to the dancing saloonby mistake, believing that it was a genuine dancing class. I offered toassist in the young girl’s education in French and dancing. My offer wasaccepted with enthusiasm as an honour--and we are still friendly.... Ifyou like, we’ll go and see them, only not just now.”
“Stop! Enough of your vile, nasty anecdotes, depraved vile, sensualman!”
“Schiller, you are a regular Schiller! _O la vertu va-t-elle se nicher?_But you know I shall tell you these things on purpose, for the pleasureof hearing your outcries!”
“I dare say. I can see I am ridiculous myself,” muttered Raskolnikovangrily.
Svidrigaïlov laughed heartily; finally he called Philip, paid his bill,and began getting up.
“I say, but I am drunk, _assez causé_,” he said. “It’s been a pleasure.”
“I should rather think it must be a pleasure!” cried Raskolnikov,getting up. “No doubt it is a pleasure for a worn-out profligate todescribe such adventures with a monstrous project of the same sort inhis mind--especially under such circumstances and to such a man asme.... It’s stimulating!”
“Well, if you come to that,” Svidrigaïlov answered, scrutinisingRaskolnikov with some surprise, “if you come to that, you are a thoroughcynic yourself. You’ve plenty to make you so, anyway. You can understanda great deal... and you can do a great deal too. But enough. I sincerelyregret not having had more talk with you, but I shan’t lose sight ofyou.... Only wait a bit.”
Svidrigaïlov walked out of the restaurant. Raskolnikov walked out afterhim. Svidrigaïlov was not however very drunk, the wine had affected himfor a moment, but it was passing off every minute. He was preoccupiedwith something of importance and was frowning. He was apparently excitedand uneasy in anticipation of something. His manner to Raskolnikov hadchanged during the last few minutes, and he was ruder and more sneeringevery moment. Raskolnikov noticed all this, and he too was uneasy. Hebecame very suspicious of Svidrigaïlov and resolved to follow him.
They came out on to the pavement.
“You go to the right, and I to the left, or if you like, the other way.Only _adieu, mon plaisir_, may we meet again.”
And he walked to the right towards the Hay Market.
CHAPTER V
Raskolnikov walked after him.
“What’s this?” cried Svidrigaïlov turning round, “I thought I said...”
“It means that I am not going to lose sight of you now.”
“What?”
Both stood still and gazed at one another, as though measuring theirstrength.
“From all your half tipsy stories,” Raskolnikov observed harshly, “I am_positive_ that you have not given up your designs on my sister, butare pursuing them more actively than ever. I have learnt that my sisterreceived a letter this morning. You have hardly been able to sit stillall this time.... You may have unearthed a wife on the way, but thatmeans nothing. I should like to make certain myself.”
Raskolnikov could hardly have said himself what he wanted and of what hewished to make certain.
“Upon my word! I’ll call the police!”
“Call away!”
Again they stood for a minute facing each other. At last Svidrigaïlov’sface changed. Having satisfied himself that Raskolnikov was notfrightened at his threat, he assumed a mirthful and friendly air.
“What a fellow! I purposely refrained from referring to your affair,though I am devoured by curiosity. It’s a fantastic affair. I’ve put itoff till another time, but you’re enough to rouse the dead.... Well, letus go, only I warn you beforehand I am only going home for a moment,to get some money; then I shall lock up the flat, take a cab and go tospend the evening at the Islands. Now, now are you going to follow me?”
“I’m coming to your lodgings, not to see you but Sofya Semyonovna, tosay I’m sorry not to have been at the funeral.”
“That’s as you like, but Sofya Semyonovna is not at home. She has takenthe three children to an old lady of high rank, the patroness of someorphan asylums, whom I used to know years ago. I charmed the old lady bydepositing a sum of money with her to provide for the three children ofKaterina Ivanovna and subscribing to the institution as well. I told hertoo the story of Sofya Semyonovna in full detail, suppressing nothing.It produced an indescribable effect on her. That’s why Sofya Semyonovnahas been invited to call to-day at the X. Hotel where the lady isstaying for the time.”
“No matter, I’ll come all the same.”
“As you like, it’s nothing to me, but I won’t come with you; here we areat home. By the way, I am convinced that you regard me with suspicionjust because I have shown such delicacy and have not so far troubledyou with questions... you understand? It struck you as extraordinary; Idon’t mind betting it’s that. Well, it teaches one to show delicacy!”
“And to listen at doors!”
“Ah, that’s it, is it?” laughed Svidrigaïlov. “Yes, I should have beensurprised if you had let that pass after all that has happened. Ha-ha!Though I did understand something of the pranks you had been up to andwere telling Sofya Semyonovna about, what was the meaning of it? PerhapsI am quite behind the times and can’t understand. For goodness’ sake,explain it, my dear boy. Expound the latest theories!”
“You couldn’t have heard anything. You’re making it all up!”
“But I’m not talking about that (though I did hear something). No, I’mtalking of the way you keep sighing and groaning now. The Schiller inyou is in revolt every moment, and now you tell me not to listen atdoors. If that’s how you feel, go and inform the police that you hadthis mischance: you made a little mistake in your theory. But if you areconvinced that one mustn’t listen at doors, but one may murder old womenat one’s pleasure, you’d better be off to America and make haste. Run,young man! There may still be time. I’m speaking sincerely. Haven’t youthe money? I’ll give you the fare.”
“I’m not thinking of that at all,” Raskolnikov interrupted with disgust.
“I understand (but don’t put yourself out, don’t discuss it if you don’twant to). I understand the questions you are worrying over--moral ones,aren’t they? Duties of citizen and man? Lay them all aside. They arenothing to you now, ha-ha! You’ll say you are still a man and a citizen.If so you ought not to have got into this coil. It’s no use taking up ajob you are not fit for. Well, you’d better shoot yourself, or don’t youwant to?”
“You seem trying to enrage me, to make me leave you.”
“What a queer fellow! But here we are. Welcome to the staircase. Yousee, that’s the way to Sofya Semyonovna. Look, there is no one at home.Don’t you believe me? Ask Kapernaumov. She leaves the key with him. Hereis Madame de Kapernaumov herself. Hey, what? She is rather deaf. Has shegone out? Where? Did you hear? She is not in and won’t be till late inthe evening probably. Well, come to my room; you wanted to come and seeme, didn’t you? Here we are. Madame Resslich’s not at home. She is awoman who is always busy, an excellent woman I assure you.... She mighthave been of use to you if you had been a little more sensible. Now,see! I take this five-per-cent bond out of the bureau--see what a lotI’ve got of them still--this one will be turned into cash to-day. Imustn’t waste any more time. The bureau is locked, the flat is locked,and here we are again on the stairs. Shall we take a cab? I’m going tothe Islands. Would you like a lift? I’ll take this carriage. Ah, yourefuse? You are tired of it! Come for a drive! I believe it will come onto rain. Never mind, we’ll put down the hood....”
Svidrigaïlov was already in the carriage. Raskolnikov decided that hissuspicions were at least for that moment unjust. Without answering aword he turned and walked back towards the Hay Market. If he had onlyturned round on his way he might have seen Svidrigaïlov get out not ahundred paces off, dismiss the cab and walk along the pavement. But hehad turned the corner and could see nothing. Intense disgust drew himaway from Svidrigaïlov.
“To think that I could for one instant have looked for help from thatcoarse brute, that depraved sensualist and blackguard!” he cried.
Raskolnikov’s judgment was uttered too lightly and hastily: there wassomething about Svidrigaïlov which gave him a certain original, even amysterious character. As concerned his sister, Raskolnikov was convincedthat Svidrigaïlov would not leave her in peace. But it was too tiresomeand unbearable to go on thinking and thinking about this.
When he was alone, he had not gone twenty paces before he sank, asusual, into deep thought. On the bridge he stood by the railing andbegan gazing at the water. And his sister was standing close by him.
He met her at the entrance to the bridge, but passed by without seeingher. Dounia had never met him like this in the street before and wasstruck with dismay. She stood still and did not know whether to callto him or not. Suddenly she saw Svidrigaïlov coming quickly from thedirection of the Hay Market.
He seemed to be approaching cautiously. He did not go on to thebridge, but stood aside on the pavement, doing all he could to avoidRaskolnikov’s seeing him. He had observed Dounia for some time and hadbeen making signs to her. She fancied he was signalling to beg her notto speak to her brother, but to come to him.
That was what Dounia did. She stole by her brother and went up toSvidrigaïlov.
“Let us make haste away,” Svidrigaïlov whispered to her, “I don’t wantRodion Romanovitch to know of our meeting. I must tell you I’ve beensitting with him in the restaurant close by, where he looked me up andI had great difficulty in getting rid of him. He has somehow heard ofmy letter to you and suspects something. It wasn’t you who told him, ofcourse, but if not you, who then?”
“Well, we’ve turned the corner now,” Dounia interrupted, “and my brotherwon’t see us. I have to tell you that I am going no further with you.Speak to me here. You can tell it all in the street.”
“In the first place, I can’t say it in the street; secondly, you musthear Sofya Semyonovna too; and, thirdly, I will show you some papers....Oh well, if you won’t agree to come with me, I shall refuse to giveany explanation and go away at once. But I beg you not to forget thata very curious secret of your beloved brother’s is entirely in mykeeping.”
Dounia stood still, hesitating, and looked at Svidrigaïlov withsearching eyes.
“What are you afraid of?” he observed quietly. “The town is not thecountry. And even in the country you did me more harm than I did you.”
“Have you prepared Sofya Semyonovna?”
“No, I have not said a word to her and am not quite certain whether sheis at home now. But most likely she is. She has buried her stepmotherto-day: she is not likely to go visiting on such a day. For the time Idon’t want to speak to anyone about it and I half regret having spokento you. The slightest indiscretion is as bad as betrayal in a thing likethis. I live there in that house, we are coming to it. That’s the porterof our house--he knows me very well; you see, he’s bowing; he sees I’mcoming with a lady and no doubt he has noticed your face already and youwill be glad of that if you are afraid of me and suspicious. Excusemy putting things so coarsely. I haven’t a flat to myself; SofyaSemyonovna’s room is next to mine--she lodges in the next flat. Thewhole floor is let out in lodgings. Why are you frightened like a child?Am I really so terrible?”
Svidrigaïlov’s lips were twisted in a condescending smile; but he was inno smiling mood. His heart was throbbing and he could scarcely breathe.He spoke rather loud to cover his growing excitement. But Dounia did notnotice this peculiar excitement, she was so irritated by his remark thatshe was frightened of him like a child and that he was so terrible toher.
“Though I know that you are not a man... of honour, I am not in theleast afraid of you. Lead the way,” she said with apparent composure,but her face was very pale.
Svidrigaïlov stopped at Sonia’s room.
“Allow me to inquire whether she is at home.... She is not. Howunfortunate! But I know she may come quite soon. If she’s gone out, itcan only be to see a lady about the orphans. Their mother is dead....I’ve been meddling and making arrangements for them. If Sofya Semyonovnadoes not come back in ten minutes, I will send her to you, to-day ifyou like. This is my flat. These are my two rooms. Madame Resslich,my landlady, has the next room. Now, look this way. I will show youmy chief piece of evidence: this door from my bedroom leads into twoperfectly empty rooms, which are to let. Here they are... You must lookinto them with some attention.”
Svidrigaïlov occupied two fairly large furnished rooms. Dounia waslooking about her mistrustfully, but saw nothing special in thefurniture or position of the rooms. Yet there was something to observe,for instance, that Svidrigaïlov’s flat was exactly between two sets ofalmost uninhabited apartments. His rooms were not entered directlyfrom the passage, but through the landlady’s two almost empty rooms.Unlocking a door leading out of his bedroom, Svidrigaïlov showed Douniathe two empty rooms that were to let. Dounia stopped in the doorway, notknowing what she was called to look upon, but Svidrigaïlov hastened toexplain.
“Look here, at this second large room. Notice that door, it’s locked.By the door stands a chair, the only one in the two rooms. I brought itfrom my rooms so as to listen more conveniently. Just the other side ofthe door is Sofya Semyonovna’s table; she sat there talking to RodionRomanovitch. And I sat here listening on two successive evenings, fortwo hours each time--and of course I was able to learn something, whatdo you think?”
“You listened?”
“Yes, I did. Now come back to my room; we can’t sit down here.”
He brought Avdotya Romanovna back into his sitting-room and offered hera chair. He sat down at the opposite side of the table, at least sevenfeet from her, but probably there was the same glow in his eyes whichhad once frightened Dounia so much. She shuddered and once more lookedabout her distrustfully. It was an involuntary gesture; she evidentlydid not wish to betray her uneasiness. But the secluded position ofSvidrigaïlov’s lodging had suddenly struck her. She wanted to askwhether his landlady at least were at home, but pride kept her fromasking. Moreover, she had another trouble in her heart incomparablygreater than fear for herself. She was in great distress.
“Here is your letter,” she said, laying it on the table. “Can it be truewhat you write? You hint at a crime committed, you say, by my brother.You hint at it too clearly; you daren’t deny it now. I must tell youthat I’d heard of this stupid story before you wrote and don’t believe aword of it. It’s a disgusting and ridiculous suspicion. I know the storyand why and how it was invented. You can have no proofs. You promised toprove it. Speak! But let me warn you that I don’t believe you! I don’tbelieve you!”
Dounia said this, speaking hurriedly, and for an instant the colourrushed to her face.
“If you didn’t believe it, how could you risk coming alone to my rooms?Why have you come? Simply from curiosity?”
“Don’t torment me. Speak, speak!”
“There’s no denying that you are a brave girl. Upon my word, I thoughtyou would have asked Mr. Razumihin to escort you here. But he was notwith you nor anywhere near. I was on the look-out. It’s spirited ofyou, it proves you wanted to spare Rodion Romanovitch. But everythingis divine in you.... About your brother, what am I to say to you? You’vejust seen him yourself. What did you think of him?”
“Surely that’s not the only thing you are building on?”
“No, not on that, but on his own words. He came here on two successiveevenings to see Sofya Semyonovna. I’ve shown you where they sat. He madea full confession to her. He is a murderer. He killed an old woman, apawnbroker, with whom he had pawned things himself. He killed her sistertoo, a pedlar woman called Lizaveta, who happened to come in while hewas murdering her sister. He killed them with an axe he brought withhim. He murdered them to rob them and he did rob them. He took money andvarious things.... He told all this, word for word, to Sofya Semyonovna,the only person who knows his secret. But she has had no share by wordor deed in the murder; she was as horrified at it as you are now. Don’tbe anxious, she won’t betray him.”
“It cannot be,” muttered Dounia, with white lips. She gasped for breath.“It cannot be. There was not the slightest cause, no sort of ground....It’s a lie, a lie!”
“He robbed her, that was the cause, he took money and things. It’s truethat by his own admission he made no use of the money or things, but hidthem under a stone, where they are now. But that was because he darednot make use of them.”
“But how could he steal, rob? How could he dream of it?” cried Dounia,and she jumped up from the chair. “Why, you know him, and you’ve seenhim, can he be a thief?”
She seemed to be imploring Svidrigaïlov; she had entirely forgotten herfear.
“There are thousands and millions of combinations and possibilities,Avdotya Romanovna. A thief steals and knows he is a scoundrel, but I’veheard of a gentleman who broke open the mail. Who knows, very likely hethought he was doing a gentlemanly thing! Of course I should not havebelieved it myself if I’d been told of it as you have, but I believe myown ears. He explained all the causes of it to Sofya Semyonovna too, butshe did not believe her ears at first, yet she believed her own eyes atlast.”
“What... were the causes?”
“It’s a long story, Avdotya Romanovna. Here’s... how shall I tellyou?--A theory of a sort, the same one by which I for instance considerthat a single misdeed is permissible if the principal aim is right, asolitary wrongdoing and hundreds of good deeds! It’s galling too, ofcourse, for a young man of gifts and overweening pride to know that ifhe had, for instance, a paltry three thousand, his whole career, hiswhole future would be differently shaped and yet not to have that threethousand. Add to that, nervous irritability from hunger, from lodgingin a hole, from rags, from a vivid sense of the charm of his socialposition and his sister’s and mother’s position too. Above all, vanity,pride and vanity, though goodness knows he may have good qualitiestoo.... I am not blaming him, please don’t think it; besides, it’s notmy business. A special little theory came in too--a theory of asort--dividing mankind, you see, into material and superior persons,that is persons to whom the law does not apply owing to theirsuperiority, who make laws for the rest of mankind, the material, thatis. It’s all right as a theory, _une théorie comme une autre_. Napoleonattracted him tremendously, that is, what affected him was that agreat many men of genius have not hesitated at wrongdoing, but haveoverstepped the law without thinking about it. He seems to have fanciedthat he was a genius too--that is, he was convinced of it for a time. Hehas suffered a great deal and is still suffering from the idea that hecould make a theory, but was incapable of boldly overstepping the law,and so he is not a man of genius. And that’s humiliating for a young manof any pride, in our day especially....”
“But remorse? You deny him any moral feeling then? Is he like that?”
“Ah, Avdotya Romanovna, everything is in a muddle now; not that it wasever in very good order. Russians in general are broad in their ideas,Avdotya Romanovna, broad like their land and exceedingly disposed tothe fantastic, the chaotic. But it’s a misfortune to be broad withouta special genius. Do you remember what a lot of talk we had together onthis subject, sitting in the evenings on the terrace after supper? Why,you used to reproach me with breadth! Who knows, perhaps we were talkingat the very time when he was lying here thinking over his plan. Thereare no sacred traditions amongst us, especially in the educated class,Avdotya Romanovna. At the best someone will make them up somehow forhimself out of books or from some old chronicle. But those are for themost part the learned and all old fogeys, so that it would be almostill-bred in a man of society. You know my opinions in general, though. Inever blame anyone. I do nothing at all, I persevere in that. Butwe’ve talked of this more than once before. I was so happy indeed as tointerest you in my opinions.... You are very pale, Avdotya Romanovna.”
“I know his theory. I read that article of his about men to whom all ispermitted. Razumihin brought it to me.”
“Mr. Razumihin? Your brother’s article? In a magazine? Is there such anarticle? I didn’t know. It must be interesting. But where are you going,Avdotya Romanovna?”
“I want to see Sofya Semyonovna,” Dounia articulated faintly. “How do Igo to her? She has come in, perhaps. I must see her at once. Perhapsshe...”
Avdotya Romanovna could not finish. Her breath literally failed her.
“Sofya Semyonovna will not be back till night, at least I believe not.She was to have been back at once, but if not, then she will not be intill quite late.”
“Ah, then you are lying! I see... you were lying... lying all thetime.... I don’t believe you! I don’t believe you!” cried Dounia,completely losing her head.
Almost fainting, she sank on to a chair which Svidrigaïlov made haste togive her.
“Avdotya Romanovna, what is it? Control yourself! Here is some water.Drink a little....”
He sprinkled some water over her. Dounia shuddered and came to herself.
“It has acted violently,” Svidrigaïlov muttered to himself, frowning.“Avdotya Romanovna, calm yourself! Believe me, he has friends. We willsave him. Would you like me to take him abroad? I have money, I can geta ticket in three days. And as for the murder, he will do all sorts ofgood deeds yet, to atone for it. Calm yourself. He may become a greatman yet. Well, how are you? How do you feel?”
“Cruel man! To be able to jeer at it! Let me go...”
“Where are you going?”
“To him. Where is he? Do you know? Why is this door locked? We came inat that door and now it is locked. When did you manage to lock it?”
“We couldn’t be shouting all over the flat on such a subject. I am farfrom jeering; it’s simply that I’m sick of talking like this. But howcan you go in such a state? Do you want to betray him? You will drivehim to fury, and he will give himself up. Let me tell you, he is alreadybeing watched; they are already on his track. You will simply be givinghim away. Wait a little: I saw him and was talking to him just now. Hecan still be saved. Wait a bit, sit down; let us think it over together.I asked you to come in order to discuss it alone with you and toconsider it thoroughly. But do sit down!”
“How can you save him? Can he really be saved?”
Dounia sat down. Svidrigaïlov sat down beside her.
“It all depends on you, on you, on you alone,” he began with glowingeyes, almost in a whisper and hardly able to utter the words foremotion.
Dounia drew back from him in alarm. He too was trembling all over.
“You... one word from you, and he is saved. I... I’ll save him. I havemoney and friends. I’ll send him away at once. I’ll get a passport,two passports, one for him and one for me. I have friends... capablepeople.... If you like, I’ll take a passport for you... for yourmother.... What do you want with Razumihin? I love you too.... I loveyou beyond everything.... Let me kiss the hem of your dress, let me, letme.... The very rustle of it is too much for me. Tell me, ‘do that,’and I’ll do it. I’ll do everything. I will do the impossible. What youbelieve, I will believe. I’ll do anything--anything! Don’t, don’t lookat me like that. Do you know that you are killing me?...”
He was almost beginning to rave.... Something seemed suddenly to go tohis head. Dounia jumped up and rushed to the door.
“Open it! Open it!” she called, shaking the door. “Open it! Is there noone there?”
Svidrigaïlov got up and came to himself. His still trembling lips slowlybroke into an angry mocking smile.
“There is no one at home,” he said quietly and emphatically. “Thelandlady has gone out, and it’s waste of time to shout like that. Youare only exciting yourself uselessly.”
“Where is the key? Open the door at once, at once, base man!”
“I have lost the key and cannot find it.”
“This is an outrage,” cried Dounia, turning pale as death. She rushedto the furthest corner, where she made haste to barricade herself with alittle table.
She did not scream, but she fixed her eyes on her tormentor and watchedevery movement he made.
Svidrigaïlov remained standing at the other end of the room facing her.He was positively composed, at least in appearance, but his face waspale as before. The mocking smile did not leave his face.
“You spoke of outrage just now, Avdotya Romanovna. In that case youmay be sure I’ve taken measures. Sofya Semyonovna is not at home. TheKapernaumovs are far away--there are five locked rooms between. I am atleast twice as strong as you are and I have nothing to fear, besides.For you could not complain afterwards. You surely would not be willingactually to betray your brother? Besides, no one would believe you. Howshould a girl have come alone to visit a solitary man in his lodgings?So that even if you do sacrifice your brother, you could prove nothing.It is very difficult to prove an assault, Avdotya Romanovna.”
“Scoundrel!” whispered Dounia indignantly.
“As you like, but observe I was only speaking by way of a generalproposition. It’s my personal conviction that you are perfectlyright--violence is hateful. I only spoke to show you that you need haveno remorse even if... you were willing to save your brother of yourown accord, as I suggest to you. You would be simply submitting tocircumstances, to violence, in fact, if we must use that word. Thinkabout it. Your brother’s and your mother’s fate are in your hands. Iwill be your slave... all my life... I will wait here.”
Svidrigaïlov sat down on the sofa about eight steps from Dounia. She hadnot the slightest doubt now of his unbending determination. Besides, sheknew him. Suddenly she pulled out of her pocket a revolver, cocked itand laid it in her hand on the table. Svidrigaïlov jumped up.
“Aha! So that’s it, is it?” he cried, surprised but smiling maliciously.“Well, that completely alters the aspect of affairs. You’ve made thingswonderfully easier for me, Avdotya Romanovna. But where did you get therevolver? Was it Mr. Razumihin? Why, it’s my revolver, an old friend!And how I’ve hunted for it! The shooting lessons I’ve given you in thecountry have not been thrown away.”
“It’s not your revolver, it belonged to Marfa Petrovna, whom you killed,wretch! There was nothing of yours in her house. I took it when I beganto suspect what you were capable of. If you dare to advance one step, Iswear I’ll kill you.” She was frantic.
“But your brother? I ask from curiosity,” said Svidrigaïlov, stillstanding where he was.
“Inform, if you want to! Don’t stir! Don’t come nearer! I’ll shoot! Youpoisoned your wife, I know; you are a murderer yourself!” She held therevolver ready.
“Are you so positive I poisoned Marfa Petrovna?”
“You did! You hinted it yourself; you talked to me of poison.... I knowyou went to get it... you had it in readiness.... It was your doing....It must have been your doing.... Scoundrel!”
“Even if that were true, it would have been for your sake... you wouldhave been the cause.”
“You are lying! I hated you always, always....”
“Oho, Avdotya Romanovna! You seem to have forgotten how you softenedto me in the heat of propaganda. I saw it in your eyes. Do you rememberthat moonlight night, when the nightingale was singing?”
“That’s a lie,” there was a flash of fury in Dounia’s eyes, “that’s alie and a libel!”
“A lie? Well, if you like, it’s a lie. I made it up. Women ought notto be reminded of such things,” he smiled. “I know you will shoot, youpretty wild creature. Well, shoot away!”
Dounia raised the revolver, and deadly pale, gazed at him, measuring thedistance and awaiting the first movement on his part. Her lower lip waswhite and quivering and her big black eyes flashed like fire. He hadnever seen her so handsome. The fire glowing in her eyes at the momentshe raised the revolver seemed to kindle him and there was a pang ofanguish in his heart. He took a step forward and a shot rang out. Thebullet grazed his hair and flew into the wall behind. He stood still andlaughed softly.
“The wasp has stung me. She aimed straight at my head. What’s this?Blood?” he pulled out his handkerchief to wipe the blood, which flowedin a thin stream down his right temple. The bullet seemed to have justgrazed the skin.
Dounia lowered the revolver and looked at Svidrigaïlov not so much interror as in a sort of wild amazement. She seemed not to understand whatshe was doing and what was going on.
“Well, you missed! Fire again, I’ll wait,” said Svidrigaïlov softly,still smiling, but gloomily. “If you go on like that, I shall have timeto seize you before you cock again.”
Dounia started, quickly cocked the pistol and again raised it.
“Let me be,” she cried in despair. “I swear I’ll shoot again. I... I’llkill you.”
“Well... at three paces you can hardly help it. But if you don’t...then.” His eyes flashed and he took two steps forward. Dounia shotagain: it missed fire.
“You haven’t loaded it properly. Never mind, you have another chargethere. Get it ready, I’ll wait.”
He stood facing her, two paces away, waiting and gazing at her with wilddetermination, with feverishly passionate, stubborn, set eyes. Douniasaw that he would sooner die than let her go. “And... now, of course shewould kill him, at two paces!” Suddenly she flung away the revolver.
“She’s dropped it!” said Svidrigaïlov with surprise, and he drew a deepbreath. A weight seemed to have rolled from his heart--perhaps not onlythe fear of death; indeed he may scarcely have felt it at that moment.It was the deliverance from another feeling, darker and more bitter,which he could not himself have defined.
He went to Dounia and gently put his arm round her waist. She did notresist, but, trembling like a leaf, looked at him with suppliant eyes.He tried to say something, but his lips moved without being able toutter a sound.
“Let me go,” Dounia implored. Svidrigaïlov shuddered. Her voice now wasquite different.
“Then you don’t love me?” he asked softly. Dounia shook her head.
“And... and you can’t? Never?” he whispered in despair.
“Never!”
There followed a moment of terrible, dumb struggle in the heart ofSvidrigaïlov. He looked at her with an indescribable gaze. Suddenlyhe withdrew his arm, turned quickly to the window and stood facing it.Another moment passed.
“Here’s the key.”
He took it out of the left pocket of his coat and laid it on the tablebehind him, without turning or looking at Dounia.
“Take it! Make haste!”
He looked stubbornly out of the window. Dounia went up to the table totake the key.
“Make haste! Make haste!” repeated Svidrigaïlov, still without turningor moving. But there seemed a terrible significance in the tone of that“make haste.”
Dounia understood it, snatched up the key, flew to the door, unlocked itquickly and rushed out of the room. A minute later, beside herself, sheran out on to the canal bank in the direction of X. Bridge.
Svidrigaïlov remained three minutes standing at the window. At last heslowly turned, looked about him and passed his hand over his forehead. Astrange smile contorted his face, a pitiful, sad, weak smile, a smile ofdespair. The blood, which was already getting dry, smeared his hand.He looked angrily at it, then wetted a towel and washed his temple.The revolver which Dounia had flung away lay near the door and suddenlycaught his eye. He picked it up and examined it. It was a little pocketthree-barrel revolver of old-fashioned construction. There were stilltwo charges and one capsule left in it. It could be fired again. Hethought a little, put the revolver in his pocket, took his hat and wentout.
CHAPTER VI
He spent that evening till ten o’clock going from one low haunt toanother. Katia too turned up and sang another gutter song, how a certain
“villain and tyrant,”
“began kissing Katia.”
Svidrigaïlov treated Katia and the organ-grinder and some singers andthe waiters and two little clerks. He was particularly drawn to theseclerks by the fact that they both had crooked noses, one bent to theleft and the other to the right. They took him finally to a pleasuregarden, where he paid for their entrance. There was one lankythree-year-old pine-tree and three bushes in the garden, besides a“Vauxhall,” which was in reality a drinking-bar where tea too wasserved, and there were a few green tables and chairs standing round it.A chorus of wretched singers and a drunken but exceedingly depressedGerman clown from Munich with a red nose entertained the public. Theclerks quarrelled with some other clerks and a fight seemed imminent.Svidrigaïlov was chosen to decide the dispute. He listened to them fora quarter of an hour, but they shouted so loud that there was nopossibility of understanding them. The only fact that seemed certain wasthat one of them had stolen something and had even succeeded inselling it on the spot to a Jew, but would not share the spoil with hiscompanion. Finally it appeared that the stolen object was a teaspoonbelonging to the Vauxhall. It was missed and the affair began to seemtroublesome. Svidrigaïlov paid for the spoon, got up, and walked out ofthe garden. It was about six o’clock. He had not drunk a drop of wineall this time and had ordered tea more for the sake of appearances thananything.
It was a dark and stifling evening. Threatening storm-clouds came overthe sky about ten o’clock. There was a clap of thunder, and the raincame down like a waterfall. The water fell not in drops, but beat on theearth in streams. There were flashes of lightning every minute and eachflash lasted while one could count five.
Drenched to the skin, he went home, locked himself in, opened thebureau, took out all his money and tore up two or three papers. Then,putting the money in his pocket, he was about to change his clothes,but, looking out of the window and listening to the thunder and therain, he gave up the idea, took up his hat and went out of the roomwithout locking the door. He went straight to Sonia. She was at home.
She was not alone: the four Kapernaumov children were with her. Shewas giving them tea. She received Svidrigaïlov in respectful silence,looking wonderingly at his soaking clothes. The children all ran away atonce in indescribable terror.
Svidrigaïlov sat down at the table and asked Sonia to sit beside him.She timidly prepared to listen.
“I may be going to America, Sofya Semyonovna,” said Svidrigaïlov, “andas I am probably seeing you for the last time, I have come to make somearrangements. Well, did you see the lady to-day? I know what she said toyou, you need not tell me.” (Sonia made a movement and blushed.) “Thosepeople have their own way of doing things. As to your sisters and yourbrother, they are really provided for and the money assigned to themI’ve put into safe keeping and have received acknowledgments. You hadbetter take charge of the receipts, in case anything happens. Here, takethem! Well now, that’s settled. Here are three 5-per-cent bonds to thevalue of three thousand roubles. Take those for yourself, entirely foryourself, and let that be strictly between ourselves, so that no oneknows of it, whatever you hear. You will need the money, for to go onliving in the old way, Sofya Semyonovna, is bad, and besides there is noneed for it now.”
“I am so much indebted to you, and so are the children and mystepmother,” said Sonia hurriedly, “and if I’ve said so little... pleasedon’t consider...”
“That’s enough! that’s enough!”
“But as for the money, Arkady Ivanovitch, I am very grateful to you,but I don’t need it now. I can always earn my own living. Don’t think meungrateful. If you are so charitable, that money....”
“It’s for you, for you, Sofya Semyonovna, and please don’t waste wordsover it. I haven’t time for it. You will want it. Rodion Romanovitchhas two alternatives: a bullet in the brain or Siberia.” (Sonia lookedwildly at him, and started.) “Don’t be uneasy, I know all about it fromhimself and I am not a gossip; I won’t tell anyone. It was good advicewhen you told him to give himself up and confess. It would be muchbetter for him. Well, if it turns out to be Siberia, he will go andyou will follow him. That’s so, isn’t it? And if so, you’ll need money.You’ll need it for him, do you understand? Giving it to you is the sameas my giving it to him. Besides, you promised Amalia Ivanovna to paywhat’s owing. I heard you. How can you undertake such obligations soheedlessly, Sofya Semyonovna? It was Katerina Ivanovna’s debt and notyours, so you ought not to have taken any notice of the German woman.You can’t get through the world like that. If you are ever questionedabout me--to-morrow or the day after you will be asked--don’t sayanything about my coming to see you now and don’t show the money toanyone or say a word about it. Well, now good-bye.” (He got up.) “Mygreetings to Rodion Romanovitch. By the way, you’d better put the moneyfor the present in Mr. Razumihin’s keeping. You know Mr. Razumihin? Ofcourse you do. He’s not a bad fellow. Take it to him to-morrow or...when the time comes. And till then, hide it carefully.”
Sonia too jumped up from her chair and looked in dismay at Svidrigaïlov.She longed to speak, to ask a question, but for the first moments shedid not dare and did not know how to begin.
“How can you... how can you be going now, in such rain?”
“Why, be starting for America, and be stopped by rain! Ha, ha! Good-bye,Sofya Semyonovna, my dear! Live and live long, you will be of use toothers. By the way... tell Mr. Razumihin I send my greetings to him.Tell him Arkady Ivanovitch Svidrigaïlov sends his greetings. Be sureto.”
He went out, leaving Sonia in a state of wondering anxiety and vagueapprehension.
It appeared afterwards that on the same evening, at twenty past eleven,he made another very eccentric and unexpected visit. The rain stillpersisted. Drenched to the skin, he walked into the little flat wherethe parents of his betrothed lived, in Third Street in VassilyevskyIsland. He knocked some time before he was admitted, and his visitat first caused great perturbation; but Svidrigaïlov could bevery fascinating when he liked, so that the first, and indeed veryintelligent surmise of the sensible parents that Svidrigaïlov hadprobably had so much to drink that he did not know what he was doingvanished immediately. The decrepit father was wheeled in to seeSvidrigaïlov by the tender and sensible mother, who as usual began theconversation with various irrelevant questions. She never asked a directquestion, but began by smiling and rubbing her hands and then, if shewere obliged to ascertain something--for instance, when Svidrigaïlovwould like to have the wedding--she would begin by interested andalmost eager questions about Paris and the court life there, and onlyby degrees brought the conversation round to Third Street. On otheroccasions this had of course been very impressive, but this time ArkadyIvanovitch seemed particularly impatient, and insisted on seeing hisbetrothed at once, though he had been informed, to begin with, that shehad already gone to bed. The girl of course appeared.
Svidrigaïlov informed her at once that he was obliged by very importantaffairs to leave Petersburg for a time, and therefore brought herfifteen thousand roubles and begged her accept them as a present fromhim, as he had long been intending to make her this trifling presentbefore their wedding. The logical connection of the present with hisimmediate departure and the absolute necessity of visiting them for thatpurpose in pouring rain at midnight was not made clear. But it all wentoff very well; even the inevitable ejaculations of wonder and regret,the inevitable questions were extraordinarily few and restrained. On theother hand, the gratitude expressed was most glowing and was reinforcedby tears from the most sensible of mothers. Svidrigaïlov got up,laughed, kissed his betrothed, patted her cheek, declared he would sooncome back, and noticing in her eyes, together with childish curiosity, asort of earnest dumb inquiry, reflected and kissed her again, thoughhe felt sincere anger inwardly at the thought that his present would beimmediately locked up in the keeping of the most sensible of mothers. Hewent away, leaving them all in a state of extraordinary excitement, butthe tender mamma, speaking quietly in a half whisper, settled some ofthe most important of their doubts, concluding that Svidrigaïlov wasa great man, a man of great affairs and connections and of greatwealth--there was no knowing what he had in his mind. He would startoff on a journey and give away money just as the fancy took him, so thatthere was nothing surprising about it. Of course it was strange that hewas wet through, but Englishmen, for instance, are even more eccentric,and all these people of high society didn’t think of what was said ofthem and didn’t stand on ceremony. Possibly, indeed, he came like thaton purpose to show that he was not afraid of anyone. Above all, not aword should be said about it, for God knows what might come of it, andthe money must be locked up, and it was most fortunate that Fedosya, thecook, had not left the kitchen. And above all not a word must be saidto that old cat, Madame Resslich, and so on and so on. They sat upwhispering till two o’clock, but the girl went to bed much earlier,amazed and rather sorrowful.
Svidrigaïlov meanwhile, exactly at midnight, crossed the bridge on theway back to the mainland. The rain had ceased and there was a roaringwind. He began shivering, and for one moment he gazed at the blackwaters of the Little Neva with a look of special interest, even inquiry.But he soon felt it very cold, standing by the water; he turned andwent towards Y. Prospect. He walked along that endless street for a longtime, almost half an hour, more than once stumbling in the dark on thewooden pavement, but continually looking for something on the right sideof the street. He had noticed passing through this street lately thatthere was a hotel somewhere towards the end, built of wood, but fairlylarge, and its name he remembered was something like Adrianople. He wasnot mistaken: the hotel was so conspicuous in that God-forsaken placethat he could not fail to see it even in the dark. It was a long,blackened wooden building, and in spite of the late hour there werelights in the windows and signs of life within. He went in and askeda ragged fellow who met him in the corridor for a room. The latter,scanning Svidrigaïlov, pulled himself together and led him at once to aclose and tiny room in the distance, at the end of the corridor, underthe stairs. There was no other, all were occupied. The ragged fellowlooked inquiringly.
“Is there tea?” asked Svidrigaïlov.
“Yes, sir.”
“What else is there?”
“Veal, vodka, savouries.”
“Bring me tea and veal.”
“And you want nothing else?” he asked with apparent surprise.
“Nothing, nothing.”
The ragged man went away, completely disillusioned.
“It must be a nice place,” thought Svidrigaïlov. “How was it I didn’tknow it? I expect I look as if I came from a café chantant and havehad some adventure on the way. It would be interesting to know who stayedhere?”
He lighted the candle and looked at the room more carefully. It was aroom so low-pitched that Svidrigaïlov could only just stand up in it;it had one window; the bed, which was very dirty, and the plain-stainedchair and table almost filled it up. The walls looked as though theywere made of planks, covered with shabby paper, so torn and dustythat the pattern was indistinguishable, though the generalcolour--yellow--could still be made out. One of the walls was cut shortby the sloping ceiling, though the room was not an attic but just underthe stairs.
Svidrigaïlov set down the candle, sat down on the bed and sank intothought. But a strange persistent murmur which sometimes rose to a shoutin the next room attracted his attention. The murmur had not ceased fromthe moment he entered the room. He listened: someone was upbraiding andalmost tearfully scolding, but he heard only one voice.
Svidrigaïlov got up, shaded the light with his hand and at once he sawlight through a crack in the wall; he went up and peeped through. Theroom, which was somewhat larger than his, had two occupants. One ofthem, a very curly-headed man with a red inflamed face, was standingin the pose of an orator, without his coat, with his legs wide apart topreserve his balance, and smiting himself on the breast. He reproachedthe other with being a beggar, with having no standing whatever. Hedeclared that he had taken the other out of the gutter and he could turnhim out when he liked, and that only the finger of Providence sees itall. The object of his reproaches was sitting in a chair, and had theair of a man who wants dreadfully to sneeze, but can’t. He sometimesturned sheepish and befogged eyes on the speaker, but obviously had notthe slightest idea what he was talking about and scarcely heard it. Acandle was burning down on the table; there were wine-glasses, a nearlyempty bottle of vodka, bread and cucumber, and glasses with the dregsof stale tea. After gazing attentively at this, Svidrigaïlov turned awayindifferently and sat down on the bed.
The ragged attendant, returning with the tea, could not resist askinghim again whether he didn’t want anything more, and again receiving anegative reply, finally withdrew. Svidrigaïlov made haste to drink aglass of tea to warm himself, but could not eat anything. He beganto feel feverish. He took off his coat and, wrapping himself in theblanket, lay down on the bed. He was annoyed. “It would have been betterto be well for the occasion,” he thought with a smile. The room wasclose, the candle burnt dimly, the wind was roaring outside, he hearda mouse scratching in the corner and the room smelt of mice and ofleather. He lay in a sort of reverie: one thought followed another. Hefelt a longing to fix his imagination on something. “It must be a gardenunder the window,” he thought. “There’s a sound of trees. How I dislikethe sound of trees on a stormy night, in the dark! They give one ahorrid feeling.” He remembered how he had disliked it when he passedPetrovsky Park just now. This reminded him of the bridge over the LittleNeva and he felt cold again as he had when standing there. “I never haveliked water,” he thought, “even in a landscape,” and he suddenly smiledagain at a strange idea: “Surely now all these questions of taste andcomfort ought not to matter, but I’ve become more particular, like ananimal that picks out a special place... for such an occasion. I oughtto have gone into the Petrovsky Park! I suppose it seemed dark, cold,ha-ha! As though I were seeking pleasant sensations!... By the way, whyhaven’t I put out the candle?” he blew it out. “They’ve gone to bed nextdoor,” he thought, not seeing the light at the crack. “Well, now, MarfaPetrovna, now is the time for you to turn up; it’s dark, and the verytime and place for you. But now you won’t come!”
He suddenly recalled how, an hour before carrying out his design onDounia, he had recommended Raskolnikov to trust her to Razumihin’skeeping. “I suppose I really did say it, as Raskolnikov guessed, totease myself. But what a rogue that Raskolnikov is! He’s gone through agood deal. He may be a successful rogue in time when he’s got overhis nonsense. But now he’s _too_ eager for life. These young menare contemptible on that point. But, hang the fellow! Let him pleasehimself, it’s nothing to do with me.”
He could not get to sleep. By degrees Dounia’s image rose before him,and a shudder ran over him. “No, I must give up all that now,” hethought, rousing himself. “I must think of something else. It’s queerand funny. I never had a great hatred for anyone, I never particularlydesired to avenge myself even, and that’s a bad sign, a bad sign, a badsign. I never liked quarrelling either, and never lost my temper--that’sa bad sign too. And the promises I made her just now, too--Damnation!But--who knows?--perhaps she would have made a new man of mesomehow....”
He ground his teeth and sank into silence again. Again Dounia’s imagerose before him, just as she was when, after shooting the first time,she had lowered the revolver in terror and gazed blankly at him, so thathe might have seized her twice over and she would not have lifted a handto defend herself if he had not reminded her. He recalled how at thatinstant he felt almost sorry for her, how he had felt a pang at hisheart...
“Aïe! Damnation, these thoughts again! I must put it away!”
He was dozing off; the feverish shiver had ceased, when suddenlysomething seemed to run over his arm and leg under the bedclothes. Hestarted. “Ugh! hang it! I believe it’s a mouse,” he thought, “that’s theveal I left on the table.” He felt fearfully disinclined to pull off theblanket, get up, get cold, but all at once something unpleasant ran overhis leg again. He pulled off the blanket and lighted the candle. Shakingwith feverish chill he bent down to examine the bed: there was nothing.He shook the blanket and suddenly a mouse jumped out on the sheet.He tried to catch it, but the mouse ran to and fro in zigzags withoutleaving the bed, slipped between his fingers, ran over his hand andsuddenly darted under the pillow. He threw down the pillow, but in oneinstant felt something leap on his chest and dart over his body and downhis back under his shirt. He trembled nervously and woke up.
The room was dark. He was lying on the bed and wrapped up in the blanketas before. The wind was howling under the window. “How disgusting,” hethought with annoyance.
He got up and sat on the edge of the bedstead with his back to thewindow. “It’s better not to sleep at all,” he decided. There was a colddamp draught from the window, however; without getting up he drew theblanket over him and wrapped himself in it. He was not thinking ofanything and did not want to think. But one image rose after another,incoherent scraps of thought without beginning or end passed through hismind. He sank into drowsiness. Perhaps the cold, or the dampness, orthe dark, or the wind that howled under the window and tossed the treesroused a sort of persistent craving for the fantastic. He kept dwellingon images of flowers, he fancied a charming flower garden, a bright,warm, almost hot day, a holiday--Trinity day. A fine, sumptuous countrycottage in the English taste overgrown with fragrant flowers, withflower beds going round the house; the porch, wreathed in climbers, wassurrounded with beds of roses. A light, cool staircase, carpeted withrich rugs, was decorated with rare plants in china pots. He noticedparticularly in the windows nosegays of tender, white, heavily fragrantnarcissus bending over their bright, green, thick long stalks. He wasreluctant to move away from them, but he went up the stairs and cameinto a large, high drawing-room and again everywhere--at the windows,the doors on to the balcony, and on the balcony itself--were flowers.The floors were strewn with freshly-cut fragrant hay, the windowswere open, a fresh, cool, light air came into the room. The birds werechirruping under the window, and in the middle of the room, on a tablecovered with a white satin shroud, stood a coffin. The coffin wascovered with white silk and edged with a thick white frill; wreaths offlowers surrounded it on all sides. Among the flowers lay a girl in awhite muslin dress, with her arms crossed and pressed on her bosom, asthough carved out of marble. But her loose fair hair was wet; there wasa wreath of roses on her head. The stern and already rigid profile ofher face looked as though chiselled of marble too, and the smile on herpale lips was full of an immense unchildish misery and sorrowful appeal.Svidrigaïlov knew that girl; there was no holy image, no burning candlebeside the coffin; no sound of prayers: the girl had drowned herself.She was only fourteen, but her heart was broken. And she had destroyedherself, crushed by an insult that had appalled and amazed that childishsoul, had smirched that angel purity with unmerited disgrace and tornfrom her a last scream of despair, unheeded and brutally disregarded, ona dark night in the cold and wet while the wind howled....
Svidrigaïlov came to himself, got up from the bed and went to thewindow. He felt for the latch and opened it. The wind lashed furiouslyinto the little room and stung his face and his chest, only covered withhis shirt, as though with frost. Under the window there must have beensomething like a garden, and apparently a pleasure garden. There, too,probably there were tea-tables and singing in the daytime. Now drops ofrain flew in at the window from the trees and bushes; it was dark asin a cellar, so that he could only just make out some dark blurs ofobjects. Svidrigaïlov, bending down with elbows on the window-sill,gazed for five minutes into the darkness; the boom of a cannon, followedby a second one, resounded in the darkness of the night. “Ah, thesignal! The river is overflowing,” he thought. “By morning it will beswirling down the street in the lower parts, flooding the basements andcellars. The cellar rats will swim out, and men will curse in the rainand wind as they drag their rubbish to their upper storeys. What time isit now?” And he had hardly thought it when, somewhere near, a clock onthe wall, ticking away hurriedly, struck three.
“Aha! It will be light in an hour! Why wait? I’ll go out at oncestraight to the park. I’ll choose a great bush there drenched with rain,so that as soon as one’s shoulder touches it, millions of drops drip onone’s head.”
He moved away from the window, shut it, lighted the candle, put on hiswaistcoat, his overcoat and his hat and went out, carrying the candle,into the passage to look for the ragged attendant who would be asleepsomewhere in the midst of candle-ends and all sorts of rubbish, to payhim for the room and leave the hotel. “It’s the best minute; I couldn’tchoose a better.”
He walked for some time through a long narrow corridor without findinganyone and was just going to call out, when suddenly in a dark cornerbetween an old cupboard and the door he caught sight of a strange objectwhich seemed to be alive. He bent down with the candle and saw a littlegirl, not more than five years old, shivering and crying, with herclothes as wet as a soaking house-flannel. She did not seem afraid ofSvidrigaïlov, but looked at him with blank amazement out of her bigblack eyes. Now and then she sobbed as children do when they have beencrying a long time, but are beginning to be comforted. The child’s facewas pale and tired, she was numb with cold. “How can she have come here?She must have hidden here and not slept all night.” He began questioningher. The child suddenly becoming animated, chattered away in her babylanguage, something about “mammy” and that “mammy would beat her,” andabout some cup that she had “bwoken.” The child chattered on withoutstopping. He could only guess from what she said that she was aneglected child, whose mother, probably a drunken cook, in the serviceof the hotel, whipped and frightened her; that the child had brokena cup of her mother’s and was so frightened that she had run away theevening before, had hidden for a long while somewhere outside in therain, at last had made her way in here, hidden behind the cupboard andspent the night there, crying and trembling from the damp, the darknessand the fear that she would be badly beaten for it. He took her in hisarms, went back to his room, sat her on the bed, and began undressingher. The torn shoes which she had on her stockingless feet were aswet as if they had been standing in a puddle all night. When he hadundressed her, he put her on the bed, covered her up and wrapped her inthe blanket from her head downwards. She fell asleep at once. Then hesank into dreary musing again.
“What folly to trouble myself,” he decided suddenly with an oppressivefeeling of annoyance. “What idiocy!” In vexation he took up the candleto go and look for the ragged attendant again and make haste to go away.“Damn the child!” he thought as he opened the door, but he turned againto see whether the child was asleep. He raised the blanket carefully.The child was sleeping soundly, she had got warm under the blanket,and her pale cheeks were flushed. But strange to say that flush seemedbrighter and coarser than the rosy cheeks of childhood. “It’s a flushof fever,” thought Svidrigaïlov. It was like the flush from drinking, asthough she had been given a full glass to drink. Her crimson lips werehot and glowing; but what was this? He suddenly fancied that her longblack eyelashes were quivering, as though the lids were opening and asly crafty eye peeped out with an unchildlike wink, as though the littlegirl were not asleep, but pretending. Yes, it was so. Her lips parted ina smile. The corners of her mouth quivered, as though she were trying tocontrol them. But now she quite gave up all effort, now it was a grin,a broad grin; there was something shameless, provocative in that quiteunchildish face; it was depravity, it was the face of a harlot, theshameless face of a French harlot. Now both eyes opened wide; theyturned a glowing, shameless glance upon him; they laughed, invitedhim.... There was something infinitely hideous and shocking in thatlaugh, in those eyes, in such nastiness in the face of a child. “What,at five years old?” Svidrigaïlov muttered in genuine horror. “What doesit mean?” And now she turned to him, her little face all aglow, holdingout her arms.... “Accursed child!” Svidrigaïlov cried, raising his handto strike her, but at that moment he woke up.
He was in the same bed, still wrapped in the blanket. The candle had notbeen lighted, and daylight was streaming in at the windows.
“I’ve had nightmare all night!” He got up angrily, feeling utterlyshattered; his bones ached. There was a thick mist outside and he couldsee nothing. It was nearly five. He had overslept himself! He got up,put on his still damp jacket and overcoat. Feeling the revolver in hispocket, he took it out and then he sat down, took a notebook out of hispocket and in the most conspicuous place on the title page wrote a fewlines in large letters. Reading them over, he sank into thought with hiselbows on the table. The revolver and the notebook lay beside him. Someflies woke up and settled on the untouched veal, which was still onthe table. He stared at them and at last with his free right hand begantrying to catch one. He tried till he was tired, but could not catch it.At last, realising that he was engaged in this interesting pursuit, hestarted, got up and walked resolutely out of the room. A minute later hewas in the street.
A thick milky mist hung over the town. Svidrigaïlov walked along theslippery dirty wooden pavement towards the Little Neva. He was picturingthe waters of the Little Neva swollen in the night, Petrovsky Island,the wet paths, the wet grass, the wet trees and bushes and at last thebush.... He began ill-humouredly staring at the houses, trying to thinkof something else. There was not a cabman or a passer-by in the street.The bright yellow, wooden, little houses looked dirty and dejected withtheir closed shutters. The cold and damp penetrated his whole body andhe began to shiver. From time to time he came across shop signs and readeach carefully. At last he reached the end of the wooden pavement andcame to a big stone house. A dirty, shivering dog crossed his path withits tail between its legs. A man in a greatcoat lay face downwards; deaddrunk, across the pavement. He looked at him and went on. A high towerstood up on the left. “Bah!” he shouted, “here is a place. Why shouldit be Petrovsky? It will be in the presence of an official witnessanyway....”
He almost smiled at this new thought and turned into the street wherethere was the big house with the tower. At the great closed gates ofthe house, a little man stood with his shoulder leaning against them,wrapped in a grey soldier’s coat, with a copper Achilles helmet on hishead. He cast a drowsy and indifferent glance at Svidrigaïlov. Hisface wore that perpetual look of peevish dejection, which is so sourlyprinted on all faces of Jewish race without exception. They both,Svidrigaïlov and Achilles, stared at each other for a few minuteswithout speaking. At last it struck Achilles as irregular for a mannot drunk to be standing three steps from him, staring and not saying aword.
“What do you want here?” he said, without moving or changing hisposition.
“Nothing, brother, good morning,” answered Svidrigaïlov.
“This isn’t the place.”
“I am going to foreign parts, brother.”
“To foreign parts?”
“To America.”
“America.”
Svidrigaïlov took out the revolver and cocked it. Achilles raised hiseyebrows.
“I say, this is not the place for such jokes!”
“Why shouldn’t it be the place?”
“Because it isn’t.”
“Well, brother, I don’t mind that. It’s a good place. When you areasked, you just say he was going, he said, to America.”
He put the revolver to his right temple.
“You can’t do it here, it’s not the place,” cried Achilles, rousinghimself, his eyes growing bigger and bigger.
Svidrigaïlov pulled the trigger.
CHAPTER VII
The same day, about seven o’clock in the evening, Raskolnikov was onhis way to his mother’s and sister’s lodging--the lodging in Bakaleyev’shouse which Razumihin had found for them. The stairs went up fromthe street. Raskolnikov walked with lagging steps, as though stillhesitating whether to go or not. But nothing would have turned him back:his decision was taken.
“Besides, it doesn’t matter, they still know nothing,” he thought, “andthey are used to thinking of me as eccentric.”
He was appallingly dressed: his clothes torn and dirty, soaked with anight’s rain. His face was almost distorted from fatigue, exposure, theinward conflict that had lasted for twenty-four hours. He had spent allthe previous night alone, God knows where. But anyway he had reached adecision.
He knocked at the door which was opened by his mother. Dounia was notat home. Even the servant happened to be out. At first PulcheriaAlexandrovna was speechless with joy and surprise; then she took him bythe hand and drew him into the room.
“Here you are!” she began, faltering with joy. “Don’t be angry withme, Rodya, for welcoming you so foolishly with tears: I am laughing notcrying. Did you think I was crying? No, I am delighted, but I’ve gotinto such a stupid habit of shedding tears. I’ve been like that eversince your father’s death. I cry for anything. Sit down, dear boy, youmust be tired; I see you are. Ah, how muddy you are.”
“I was in the rain yesterday, mother....” Raskolnikov began.
“No, no,” Pulcheria Alexandrovna hurriedly interrupted, “you thought Iwas going to cross-question you in the womanish way I used to; don’t beanxious, I understand, I understand it all: now I’ve learned the wayshere and truly I see for myself that they are better. I’ve made up mymind once for all: how could I understand your plans and expect you togive an account of them? God knows what concerns and plans you may have,or what ideas you are hatching; so it’s not for me to keep nudging yourelbow, asking you what you are thinking about? But, my goodness! whyam I running to and fro as though I were crazy...? I am reading yourarticle in the magazine for the third time, Rodya. Dmitri Prokofitchbrought it to me. Directly I saw it I cried out to myself: ‘There,foolish one,’ I thought, ‘that’s what he is busy about; that’s thesolution of the mystery! Learned people are always like that. He mayhave some new ideas in his head just now; he is thinking them over and Iworry him and upset him.’ I read it, my dear, and of course there was agreat deal I did not understand; but that’s only natural--how should I?”
“Show me, mother.”
Raskolnikov took the magazine and glanced at his article. Incongruousas it was with his mood and his circumstances, he felt that strange andbitter sweet sensation that every author experiences the first time hesees himself in print; besides, he was only twenty-three. It lasted onlya moment. After reading a few lines he frowned and his heart throbbedwith anguish. He recalled all the inward conflict of the precedingmonths. He flung the article on the table with disgust and anger.
“But, however foolish I may be, Rodya, I can see for myself that youwill very soon be one of the leading--if not the leading man--in theworld of Russian thought. And they dared to think you were mad! Youdon’t know, but they really thought that. Ah, the despicable creatures,how could they understand genius! And Dounia, Dounia was all butbelieving it--what do you say to that? Your father sent twice tomagazines--the first time poems (I’ve got the manuscript and will showyou) and the second time a whole novel (I begged him to let me copy itout) and how we prayed that they should be taken--they weren’t! I wasbreaking my heart, Rodya, six or seven days ago over your food and yourclothes and the way you are living. But now I see again how foolishI was, for you can attain any position you like by your intellect andtalent. No doubt you don’t care about that for the present and you areoccupied with much more important matters....”
“Dounia’s not at home, mother?”
“No, Rodya. I often don’t see her; she leaves me alone. DmitriProkofitch comes to see me, it’s so good of him, and he always talksabout you. He loves you and respects you, my dear. I don’t say thatDounia is very wanting in consideration. I am not complaining. She hasher ways and I have mine; she seems to have got some secrets of late andI never have any secrets from you two. Of course, I am sure that Douniahas far too much sense, and besides she loves you and me... but I don’tknow what it will all lead to. You’ve made me so happy by coming now,Rodya, but she has missed you by going out; when she comes in I’ll tellher: ‘Your brother came in while you were out. Where have you been allthis time?’ You mustn’t spoil me, Rodya, you know; come when you can,but if you can’t, it doesn’t matter, I can wait. I shall know, anyway,that you are fond of me, that will be enough for me. I shall read whatyou write, I shall hear about you from everyone, and sometimes you’llcome yourself to see me. What could be better? Here you’ve come now tocomfort your mother, I see that.”
Here Pulcheria Alexandrovna began to cry.
“Here I am again! Don’t mind my foolishness. My goodness, why am Isitting here?” she cried, jumping up. “There is coffee and I don’t offeryou any. Ah, that’s the selfishness of old age. I’ll get it at once!”
“Mother, don’t trouble, I am going at once. I haven’t come for that.Please listen to me.”
Pulcheria Alexandrovna went up to him timidly.
“Mother, whatever happens, whatever you hear about me, whatever you aretold about me, will you always love me as you do now?” he asked suddenlyfrom the fullness of his heart, as though not thinking of his words andnot weighing them.
“Rodya, Rodya, what is the matter? How can you ask me such a question?Why, who will tell me anything about you? Besides, I shouldn’t believeanyone, I should refuse to listen.”
“I’ve come to assure you that I’ve always loved you and I am gladthat we are alone, even glad Dounia is out,” he went on with the sameimpulse. “I have come to tell you that though you will be unhappy, youmust believe that your son loves you now more than himself, and that allyou thought about me, that I was cruel and didn’t care about you, wasall a mistake. I shall never cease to love you.... Well, that’s enough:I thought I must do this and begin with this....”
Pulcheria Alexandrovna embraced him in silence, pressing him to herbosom and weeping gently.
“I don’t know what is wrong with you, Rodya,” she said at last. “I’vebeen thinking all this time that we were simply boring you and now I seethat there is a great sorrow in store for you, and that’s why you aremiserable. I’ve foreseen it a long time, Rodya. Forgive me for speakingabout it. I keep thinking about it and lie awake at nights. Your sisterlay talking in her sleep all last night, talking of nothing but you. Icaught something, but I couldn’t make it out. I felt all the morningas though I were going to be hanged, waiting for something, expectingsomething, and now it has come! Rodya, Rodya, where are you going? Youare going away somewhere?”
“Yes.”
“That’s what I thought! I can come with you, you know, if you needme. And Dounia, too; she loves you, she loves you dearly--and SofyaSemyonovna may come with us if you like. You see, I am glad to look uponher as a daughter even... Dmitri Prokofitch will help us to go together.But... where... are you going?”
“Good-bye, mother.”
“What, to-day?” she cried, as though losing him for ever.
“I can’t stay, I must go now....”
“And can’t I come with you?”
“No, but kneel down and pray to God for me. Your prayer perhaps willreach Him.”
“Let me bless you and sign you with the cross. That’s right, that’sright. Oh, God, what are we doing?”
Yes, he was glad, he was very glad that there was no one there, thathe was alone with his mother. For the first time after all those awfulmonths his heart was softened. He fell down before her, he kissed herfeet and both wept, embracing. And she was not surprised and did notquestion him this time. For some days she had realised that somethingawful was happening to her son and that now some terrible minute hadcome for him.
“Rodya, my darling, my first born,” she said sobbing, “now you are justas when you were little. You would run like this to me and hug me andkiss me. When your father was living and we were poor, you comforted ussimply by being with us and when I buried your father, how often wewept together at his grave and embraced, as now. And if I’ve been cryinglately, it’s that my mother’s heart had a foreboding of trouble. Thefirst time I saw you, that evening, you remember, as soon as we arrivedhere, I guessed simply from your eyes. My heart sank at once, and to-daywhen I opened the door and looked at you, I thought the fatal hour hadcome. Rodya, Rodya, you are not going away to-day?”
“No!”
“You’ll come again?”
“Yes... I’ll come.”
“Rodya, don’t be angry, I don’t dare to question you. I know I mustn’t.Only say two words to me--is it far where you are going?”
“Very far.”
“What is awaiting you there? Some post or career for you?”
“What God sends... only pray for me.” Raskolnikov went to the door, butshe clutched him and gazed despairingly into his eyes. Her face workedwith terror.
“Enough, mother,” said Raskolnikov, deeply regretting that he had come.
“Not for ever, it’s not yet for ever? You’ll come, you’ll cometo-morrow?”
“I will, I will, good-bye.” He tore himself away at last.
It was a warm, fresh, bright evening; it had cleared up in the morning.Raskolnikov went to his lodgings; he made haste. He wanted to finish allbefore sunset. He did not want to meet anyone till then. Going up thestairs he noticed that Nastasya rushed from the samovar to watch himintently. “Can anyone have come to see me?” he wondered. He had adisgusted vision of Porfiry. But opening his door he saw Dounia. Shewas sitting alone, plunged in deep thought, and looked as though she hadbeen waiting a long time. He stopped short in the doorway. She rose fromthe sofa in dismay and stood up facing him. Her eyes, fixed upon him,betrayed horror and infinite grief. And from those eyes alone he saw atonce that she knew.
“Am I to come in or go away?” he asked uncertainly.
“I’ve been all day with Sofya Semyonovna. We were both waiting for you.We thought that you would be sure to come there.”
Raskolnikov went into the room and sank exhausted on a chair.
“I feel weak, Dounia, I am very tired; and I should have liked at thismoment to be able to control myself.”
He glanced at her mistrustfully.
“Where were you all night?”
“I don’t remember clearly. You see, sister, I wanted to make up my mindonce for all, and several times I walked by the Neva, I remember thatI wanted to end it all there, but... I couldn’t make up my mind,” hewhispered, looking at her mistrustfully again.
“Thank God! That was just what we were afraid of, Sofya Semyonovna andI. Then you still have faith in life? Thank God, thank God!”
Raskolnikov smiled bitterly.
“I haven’t faith, but I have just been weeping in mother’s arms; Ihaven’t faith, but I have just asked her to pray for me. I don’t knowhow it is, Dounia, I don’t understand it.”
“Have you been at mother’s? Have you told her?” cried Dounia,horror-stricken. “Surely you haven’t done that?”
“No, I didn’t tell her... in words; but she understood a great deal.She heard you talking in your sleep. I am sure she half understands italready. Perhaps I did wrong in going to see her. I don’t know why I didgo. I am a contemptible person, Dounia.”
“A contemptible person, but ready to face suffering! You are, aren’tyou?”
“Yes, I am going. At once. Yes, to escape the disgrace I thought ofdrowning myself, Dounia, but as I looked into the water, I thought thatif I had considered myself strong till now I’d better not be afraid ofdisgrace,” he said, hurrying on. “It’s pride, Dounia.”
“Pride, Rodya.”
There was a gleam of fire in his lustreless eyes; he seemed to be gladto think that he was still proud.
“You don’t think, sister, that I was simply afraid of the water?” heasked, looking into her face with a sinister smile.
“Oh, Rodya, hush!” cried Dounia bitterly. Silence lasted for twominutes. He sat with his eyes fixed on the floor; Dounia stood at theother end of the table and looked at him with anguish. Suddenly he gotup.
“It’s late, it’s time to go! I am going at once to give myself up. But Idon’t know why I am going to give myself up.”
Big tears fell down her cheeks.
“You are crying, sister, but can you hold out your hand to me?”
“You doubted it?”
She threw her arms round him.
“Aren’t you half expiating your crime by facing the suffering?” shecried, holding him close and kissing him.
“Crime? What crime?” he cried in sudden fury. “That I killed a vilenoxious insect, an old pawnbroker woman, of use to no one!... Killingher was atonement for forty sins. She was sucking the life out of poorpeople. Was that a crime? I am not thinking of it and I am not thinkingof expiating it, and why are you all rubbing it in on all sides? ‘Acrime! a crime!’ Only now I see clearly the imbecility of my cowardice,now that I have decided to face this superfluous disgrace. It’s simplybecause I am contemptible and have nothing in me that I have decided to,perhaps too for my advantage, as that... Porfiry... suggested!”
“Brother, brother, what are you saying? Why, you have shed blood?” criedDounia in despair.
“Which all men shed,” he put in almost frantically, “which flows and hasalways flowed in streams, which is spilt like champagne, and for whichmen are crowned in the Capitol and are called afterwards benefactors ofmankind. Look into it more carefully and understand it! I too wanted todo good to men and would have done hundreds, thousands of good deedsto make up for that one piece of stupidity, not stupidity even, simplyclumsiness, for the idea was by no means so stupid as it seems nowthat it has failed.... (Everything seems stupid when it fails.) By thatstupidity I only wanted to put myself into an independent position, totake the first step, to obtain means, and then everything would havebeen smoothed over by benefits immeasurable in comparison.... But I...I couldn’t carry out even the first step, because I am contemptible,that’s what’s the matter! And yet I won’t look at it as you do. If I hadsucceeded I should have been crowned with glory, but now I’m trapped.”
“But that’s not so, not so! Brother, what are you saying?”
“Ah, it’s not picturesque, not æsthetically attractive! I fail tounderstand why bombarding people by regular siege is more honourable.The fear of appearances is the first symptom of impotence. I’ve never,never recognised this more clearly than now, and I am further than everfrom seeing that what I did was a crime. I’ve never, never been strongerand more convinced than now.”
The colour had rushed into his pale exhausted face, but as he utteredhis last explanation, he happened to meet Dounia’s eyes and he saw suchanguish in them that he could not help being checked. He felt that hehad, anyway, made these two poor women miserable, that he was, anyway,the cause...
“Dounia darling, if I am guilty forgive me (though I cannot be forgivenif I am guilty). Good-bye! We won’t dispute. It’s time, high time to go.Don’t follow me, I beseech you, I have somewhere else to go.... But yougo at once and sit with mother. I entreat you to! It’s my last requestof you. Don’t leave her at all; I left her in a state of anxiety, thatshe is not fit to bear; she will die or go out of her mind. Be withher! Razumihin will be with you. I’ve been talking to him.... Don’t cryabout me: I’ll try to be honest and manly all my life, even if I am amurderer. Perhaps I shall some day make a name. I won’t disgrace you,you will see; I’ll still show.... Now good-bye for the present,” heconcluded hurriedly, noticing again a strange expression in Dounia’seyes at his last words and promises. “Why are you crying? Don’t cry,don’t cry: we are not parting for ever! Ah, yes! Wait a minute, I’dforgotten!”
He went to the table, took up a thick dusty book, opened it and tookfrom between the pages a little water-colour portrait on ivory. It wasthe portrait of his landlady’s daughter, who had died of fever, thatstrange girl who had wanted to be a nun. For a minute he gazed at thedelicate expressive face of his betrothed, kissed the portrait and gaveit to Dounia.
“I used to talk a great deal about it to her, only to her,” he saidthoughtfully. “To her heart I confided much of what has since been sohideously realised. Don’t be uneasy,” he returned to Dounia, “she wasas much opposed to it as you, and I am glad that she is gone. The greatpoint is that everything now is going to be different, is going tobe broken in two,” he cried, suddenly returning to his dejection.“Everything, everything, and am I prepared for it? Do I want it myself?They say it is necessary for me to suffer! What’s the object of thesesenseless sufferings? shall I know any better what they are for, when Iam crushed by hardships and idiocy, and weak as an old man after twentyyears’ penal servitude? And what shall I have to live for then? Why am Iconsenting to that life now? Oh, I knew I was contemptible when I stoodlooking at the Neva at daybreak to-day!”
At last they both went out. It was hard for Dounia, but she loved him.She walked away, but after going fifty paces she turned round to lookat him again. He was still in sight. At the corner he too turned and forthe last time their eyes met; but noticing that she was looking at him,he motioned her away with impatience and even vexation, and turned thecorner abruptly.
“I am wicked, I see that,” he thought to himself, feeling ashamed amoment later of his angry gesture to Dounia. “But why are they so fondof me if I don’t deserve it? Oh, if only I were alone and no one lovedme and I too had never loved anyone! _Nothing of all this would havehappened._ But I wonder shall I in those fifteen or twenty years grow someek that I shall humble myself before people and whimper at every wordthat I am a criminal? Yes, that’s it, that’s it, that’s what they aresending me there for, that’s what they want. Look at them running to andfro about the streets, every one of them a scoundrel and a criminal atheart and, worse still, an idiot. But try to get me off and they’d bewild with righteous indignation. Oh, how I hate them all!”
He fell to musing by what process it could come to pass, that he couldbe humbled before all of them, indiscriminately--humbled by conviction.And yet why not? It must be so. Would not twenty years of continualbondage crush him utterly? Water wears out a stone. And why, why shouldhe live after that? Why should he go now when he knew that it would beso? It was the hundredth time perhaps that he had asked himself thatquestion since the previous evening, but still he went.
CHAPTER VIII
When he went into Sonia’s room, it was already getting dark. All daySonia had been waiting for him in terrible anxiety. Dounia had beenwaiting with her. She had come to her that morning, rememberingSvidrigaïlov’s words that Sonia knew. We will not describe theconversation and tears of the two girls, and how friendly they became.Dounia gained one comfort at least from that interview, that herbrother would not be alone. He had gone to her, Sonia, first with hisconfession; he had gone to her for human fellowship when he needed it;she would go with him wherever fate might send him. Dounia did not ask,but she knew it was so. She looked at Sonia almost with reverence andat first almost embarrassed her by it. Sonia was almost on the pointof tears. She felt herself, on the contrary, hardly worthy to look atDounia. Dounia’s gracious image when she had bowed to her so attentivelyand respectfully at their first meeting in Raskolnikov’s room hadremained in her mind as one of the fairest visions of her life.
Dounia at last became impatient and, leaving Sonia, went to herbrother’s room to await him there; she kept thinking that he would comethere first. When she had gone, Sonia began to be tortured by the dreadof his committing suicide, and Dounia too feared it. But they had spentthe day trying to persuade each other that that could not be, and bothwere less anxious while they were together. As soon as they parted, eachthought of nothing else. Sonia remembered how Svidrigaïlov had said toher the day before that Raskolnikov had two alternatives--Siberia or...Besides she knew his vanity, his pride and his lack of faith.
“Is it possible that he has nothing but cowardice and fear of death tomake him live?” she thought at last in despair.
Meanwhile the sun was setting. Sonia was standing in dejection, lookingintently out of the window, but from it she could see nothing but theunwhitewashed blank wall of the next house. At last when she began tofeel sure of his death--he walked into the room.
She gave a cry of joy, but looking carefully into his face she turnedpale.
“Yes,” said Raskolnikov, smiling. “I have come for your cross, Sonia. Itwas you told me to go to the cross-roads; why is it you are frightenednow it’s come to that?”
Sonia gazed at him astonished. His tone seemed strange to her; a coldshiver ran over her, but in a moment she guessed that the tone and thewords were a mask. He spoke to her looking away, as though to avoidmeeting her eyes.
“You see, Sonia, I’ve decided that it will be better so. There is onefact.... But it’s a long story and there’s no need to discuss it. Butdo you know what angers me? It annoys me that all those stupid brutishfaces will be gaping at me directly, pestering me with their stupidquestions, which I shall have to answer--they’ll point their fingers atme.... Tfoo! You know I am not going to Porfiry, I am sick of him. I’drather go to my friend, the Explosive Lieutenant; how I shall surprisehim, what a sensation I shall make! But I must be cooler; I’ve becometoo irritable of late. You know I was nearly shaking my fist at mysister just now, because she turned to take a last look at me. It’sa brutal state to be in! Ah! what am I coming to! Well, where are thecrosses?”
He seemed hardly to know what he was doing. He could not stay still orconcentrate his attention on anything; his ideas seemed to gallop afterone another, he talked incoherently, his hands trembled slightly.
Without a word Sonia took out of the drawer two crosses, one of cypresswood and one of copper. She made the sign of the cross over herself andover him, and put the wooden cross on his neck.
“It’s the symbol of my taking up the cross,” he laughed. “As though Ihad not suffered much till now! The wooden cross, that is the peasantone; the copper one, that is Lizaveta’s--you will wear yourself, showme! So she had it on... at that moment? I remember two things likethese too, a silver one and a little ikon. I threw them back on the oldwoman’s neck. Those would be appropriate now, really, those are what Iought to put on now.... But I am talking nonsense and forgetting whatmatters; I’m somehow forgetful.... You see I have come to warn you,Sonia, so that you might know... that’s all--that’s all I came for. ButI thought I had more to say. You wanted me to go yourself. Well, now Iam going to prison and you’ll have your wish. Well, what are you cryingfor? You too? Don’t. Leave off! Oh, how I hate it all!”
But his feeling was stirred; his heart ached, as he looked at her. “Whyis she grieving too?” he thought to himself. “What am I to her? Why doesshe weep? Why is she looking after me, like my mother or Dounia? She’llbe my nurse.”
“Cross yourself, say at least one prayer,” Sonia begged in a timidbroken voice.
“Oh certainly, as much as you like! And sincerely, Sonia, sincerely....”
But he wanted to say something quite different.
He crossed himself several times. Sonia took up her shawl and putit over her head. It was the green _drap de dames_ shawl of whichMarmeladov had spoken, “the family shawl.” Raskolnikov thought of thatlooking at it, but he did not ask. He began to feel himself that hewas certainly forgetting things and was disgustingly agitated. He wasfrightened at this. He was suddenly struck too by the thought that Soniameant to go with him.
“What are you doing? Where are you going? Stay here, stay! I’ll goalone,” he cried in cowardly vexation, and almost resentful, he movedtowards the door. “What’s the use of going in procession?” he mutteredgoing out.
Sonia remained standing in the middle of the room. He had not even saidgood-bye to her; he had forgotten her. A poignant and rebellious doubtsurged in his heart.
“Was it right, was it right, all this?” he thought again as he went downthe stairs. “Couldn’t he stop and retract it all... and not go?”
But still he went. He felt suddenly once for all that he mustn’t askhimself questions. As he turned into the street he remembered that hehad not said good-bye to Sonia, that he had left her in the middle ofthe room in her green shawl, not daring to stir after he had shoutedat her, and he stopped short for a moment. At the same instant, anotherthought dawned upon him, as though it had been lying in wait to strikehim then.
“Why, with what object did I go to her just now? I told her--onbusiness; on what business? I had no sort of business! To tell her I was_going_; but where was the need? Do I love her? No, no, I drove her awayjust now like a dog. Did I want her crosses? Oh, how low I’ve sunk! No,I wanted her tears, I wanted to see her terror, to see how her heartached! I had to have something to cling to, something to delay me, somefriendly face to see! And I dared to believe in myself, to dream of whatI would do! I am a beggarly contemptible wretch, contemptible!”
He walked along the canal bank, and he had not much further to go. Buton reaching the bridge he stopped and turning out of his way along itwent to the Hay Market.
He looked eagerly to right and left, gazed intently at every object andcould not fix his attention on anything; everything slipped away. “Inanother week, another month I shall be driven in a prison van over thisbridge, how shall I look at the canal then? I should like to rememberthis!” slipped into his mind. “Look at this sign! How shall I read thoseletters then? It’s written here ‘Campany,’ that’s a thing to remember,that letter _a_, and to look at it again in a month--how shall I lookat it then? What shall I be feeling and thinking then?... How trivialit all must be, what I am fretting about now! Of course it must all beinteresting... in its way... (Ha-ha-ha! What am I thinking about?) I ambecoming a baby, I am showing off to myself; why am I ashamed? Foo! howpeople shove! that fat man--a German he must be--who pushed againstme, does he know whom he pushed? There’s a peasant woman with a baby,begging. It’s curious that she thinks me happier than she is. I mightgive her something, for the incongruity of it. Here’s a five copeckpiece left in my pocket, where did I get it? Here, here... take it, mygood woman!”
“God bless you,” the beggar chanted in a lachrymose voice.
He went into the Hay Market. It was distasteful, very distasteful to bein a crowd, but he walked just where he saw most people. He would havegiven anything in the world to be alone; but he knew himself that hewould not have remained alone for a moment. There was a man drunk anddisorderly in the crowd; he kept trying to dance and falling down. Therewas a ring round him. Raskolnikov squeezed his way through the crowd,stared for some minutes at the drunken man and suddenly gave a shortjerky laugh. A minute later he had forgotten him and did not see him,though he still stared. He moved away at last, not remembering where hewas; but when he got into the middle of the square an emotion suddenlycame over him, overwhelming him body and mind.
He suddenly recalled Sonia’s words, “Go to the cross-roads, bow down tothe people, kiss the earth, for you have sinned against it too, and sayaloud to the whole world, ‘I am a murderer.’” He trembled, rememberingthat. And the hopeless misery and anxiety of all that time, especiallyof the last hours, had weighed so heavily upon him that he positivelyclutched at the chance of this new unmixed, complete sensation. It cameover him like a fit; it was like a single spark kindled in his soul andspreading fire through him. Everything in him softened at once and thetears started into his eyes. He fell to the earth on the spot....
He knelt down in the middle of the square, bowed down to the earth, andkissed that filthy earth with bliss and rapture. He got up and boweddown a second time.
“He’s boozed,” a youth near him observed.
There was a roar of laughter.
“He’s going to Jerusalem, brothers, and saying good-bye to his childrenand his country. He’s bowing down to all the world and kissing the greatcity of St. Petersburg and its pavement,” added a workman who was alittle drunk.
“Quite a young man, too!” observed a third.
“And a gentleman,” someone observed soberly.
“There’s no knowing who’s a gentleman and who isn’t nowadays.”
These exclamations and remarks checked Raskolnikov, and the words, “I ama murderer,” which were perhaps on the point of dropping from his lips,died away. He bore these remarks quietly, however, and, without lookinground, he turned down a street leading to the police office. He had aglimpse of something on the way which did not surprise him; he had feltthat it must be so. The second time he bowed down in the Hay Market hesaw, standing fifty paces from him on the left, Sonia. She was hidingfrom him behind one of the wooden shanties in the market-place. She hadfollowed him then on his painful way! Raskolnikov at that moment feltand knew once for all that Sonia was with him for ever and would followhim to the ends of the earth, wherever fate might take him. It wrung hisheart... but he was just reaching the fatal place.
He went into the yard fairly resolutely. He had to mount to the thirdstorey. “I shall be some time going up,” he thought. He felt as thoughthe fateful moment was still far off, as though he had plenty of timeleft for consideration.
Again the same rubbish, the same eggshells lying about on the spiralstairs, again the open doors of the flats, again the same kitchens andthe same fumes and stench coming from them. Raskolnikov had not beenhere since that day. His legs were numb and gave way under him, butstill they moved forward. He stopped for a moment to take breath, tocollect himself, so as to enter _like a man_. “But why? what for?” hewondered, reflecting. “If I must drink the cup what difference does itmake? The more revolting the better.” He imagined for an instant thefigure of the “explosive lieutenant,” Ilya Petrovitch. Was he actuallygoing to him? Couldn’t he go to someone else? To Nikodim Fomitch?Couldn’t he turn back and go straight to Nikodim Fomitch’s lodgings?At least then it would be done privately.... No, no! To the “explosivelieutenant”! If he must drink it, drink it off at once.
Turning cold and hardly conscious, he opened the door of the office.There were very few people in it this time--only a house porter and apeasant. The doorkeeper did not even peep out from behind his screen.Raskolnikov walked into the next room. “Perhaps I still need not speak,”passed through his mind. Some sort of clerk not wearing a uniform wassettling himself at a bureau to write. In a corner another clerk wasseating himself. Zametov was not there, nor, of course, Nikodim Fomitch.
“No one in?” Raskolnikov asked, addressing the person at the bureau.
“Whom do you want?”
“A-ah! Not a sound was heard, not a sight was seen, but I scent theRussian... how does it go on in the fairy tale... I’ve forgotten! ‘Atyour service!’” a familiar voice cried suddenly.
Raskolnikov shuddered. The Explosive Lieutenant stood before him. Hehad just come in from the third room. “It is the hand of fate,” thoughtRaskolnikov. “Why is he here?”
“You’ve come to see us? What about?” cried Ilya Petrovitch. Hewas obviously in an exceedingly good humour and perhaps a trifleexhilarated. “If it’s on business you are rather early.[*] It’s only achance that I am here... however I’ll do what I can. I must admit, I...what is it, what is it? Excuse me....”
[*] Dostoevsky appears to have forgotten that it is aftersunset, and that the last time Raskolnikov visited thepolice office at two in the afternoon he was reproached forcoming too late.--TRANSLATOR.
“Raskolnikov.”
“Of course, Raskolnikov. You didn’t imagine I’d forgotten? Don’t think Iam like that... Rodion Ro--Ro--Rodionovitch, that’s it, isn’t it?”
“Rodion Romanovitch.”
“Yes, yes, of course, Rodion Romanovitch! I was just getting at it. Imade many inquiries about you. I assure you I’ve been genuinely grievedsince that... since I behaved like that... it was explained to meafterwards that you were a literary man... and a learned one too... andso to say the first steps... Mercy on us! What literary or scientificman does not begin by some originality of conduct! My wife and I havethe greatest respect for literature, in my wife it’s a genuine passion!Literature and art! If only a man is a gentleman, all the rest can begained by talents, learning, good sense, genius. As for a hat--well,what does a hat matter? I can buy a hat as easily as I can a bun; butwhat’s under the hat, what the hat covers, I can’t buy that! I was evenmeaning to come and apologise to you, but thought maybe you’d... But Iam forgetting to ask you, is there anything you want really? I hear yourfamily have come?”
“Yes, my mother and sister.”
“I’ve even had the honour and happiness of meeting your sister--a highlycultivated and charming person. I confess I was sorry I got so hot withyou. There it is! But as for my looking suspiciously at your faintingfit--that affair has been cleared up splendidly! Bigotry and fanaticism!I understand your indignation. Perhaps you are changing your lodging onaccount of your family’s arriving?”
“No, I only looked in... I came to ask... I thought that I should findZametov here.”
“Oh, yes! Of course, you’ve made friends, I heard. Well, no, Zametov isnot here. Yes, we’ve lost Zametov. He’s not been here since yesterday...he quarrelled with everyone on leaving... in the rudest way. He is afeather-headed youngster, that’s all; one might have expected somethingfrom him, but there, you know what they are, our brilliant young men.He wanted to go in for some examination, but it’s only to talk andboast about it, it will go no further than that. Of course it’s a verydifferent matter with you or Mr. Razumihin there, your friend. Yourcareer is an intellectual one and you won’t be deterred by failure. Foryou, one may say, all the attractions of life _nihil est_--you are anascetic, a monk, a hermit!... A book, a pen behind your ear, a learnedresearch--that’s where your spirit soars! I am the same way myself....Have you read Livingstone’s Travels?”
“No.”
“Oh, I have. There are a great many Nihilists about nowadays, you know,and indeed it is not to be wondered at. What sort of days are they? Iask you. But we thought... you are not a Nihilist of course? Answer meopenly, openly!”
“N-no...”
“Believe me, you can speak openly to me as you would to yourself!Official duty is one thing but... you are thinking I meant to say_friendship_ is quite another? No, you’re wrong! It’s not friendship,but the feeling of a man and a citizen, the feeling of humanity and oflove for the Almighty. I may be an official, but I am always boundto feel myself a man and a citizen.... You were asking about Zametov.Zametov will make a scandal in the French style in a house of badreputation, over a glass of champagne... that’s all your Zametov is goodfor! While I’m perhaps, so to speak, burning with devotion and loftyfeelings, and besides I have rank, consequence, a post! I am married andhave children, I fulfil the duties of a man and a citizen, but who ishe, may I ask? I appeal to you as a man ennobled by education... Thenthese midwives, too, have become extraordinarily numerous.”
Raskolnikov raised his eyebrows inquiringly. The words of IlyaPetrovitch, who had obviously been dining, were for the most part astream of empty sounds for him. But some of them he understood. Helooked at him inquiringly, not knowing how it would end.
“I mean those crop-headed wenches,” the talkative Ilya Petrovitchcontinued. “Midwives is my name for them. I think it a very satisfactoryone, ha-ha! They go to the Academy, study anatomy. If I fall ill, amI to send for a young lady to treat me? What do you say? Ha-ha!” IlyaPetrovitch laughed, quite pleased with his own wit. “It’s an immoderatezeal for education, but once you’re educated, that’s enough. Why abuseit? Why insult honourable people, as that scoundrel Zametov does? Whydid he insult me, I ask you? Look at these suicides, too, how commonthey are, you can’t fancy! People spend their last halfpenny and killthemselves, boys and girls and old people. Only this morning we heardabout a gentleman who had just come to town. Nil Pavlitch, I say, whatwas the name of that gentleman who shot himself?”
“Svidrigaïlov,” someone answered from the other room with drowsylistlessness.
Raskolnikov started.
“Svidrigaïlov! Svidrigaïlov has shot himself!” he cried.
“What, do you know Svidrigaïlov?”
“Yes... I knew him.... He hadn’t been here long.”
“Yes, that’s so. He had lost his wife, was a man of reckless habits andall of a sudden shot himself, and in such a shocking way.... He leftin his notebook a few words: that he dies in full possession of hisfaculties and that no one is to blame for his death. He had money, theysay. How did you come to know him?”
“I... was acquainted... my sister was governess in his family.”
“Bah-bah-bah! Then no doubt you can tell us something about him. You hadno suspicion?”
“I saw him yesterday... he... was drinking wine; I knew nothing.”
Raskolnikov felt as though something had fallen on him and was stiflinghim.
“You’ve turned pale again. It’s so stuffy here...”
“Yes, I must go,” muttered Raskolnikov. “Excuse my troubling you....”
“Oh, not at all, as often as you like. It’s a pleasure to see you and Iam glad to say so.”
Ilya Petrovitch held out his hand.
“I only wanted... I came to see Zametov.”
“I understand, I understand, and it’s a pleasure to see you.”
“I... am very glad... good-bye,” Raskolnikov smiled.
He went out; he reeled, he was overtaken with giddiness and did not knowwhat he was doing. He began going down the stairs, supporting himselfwith his right hand against the wall. He fancied that a porter pushedpast him on his way upstairs to the police office, that a dog inthe lower storey kept up a shrill barking and that a woman flung arolling-pin at it and shouted. He went down and out into the yard.There, not far from the entrance, stood Sonia, pale and horror-stricken.She looked wildly at him. He stood still before her. There was a look ofpoignant agony, of despair, in her face. She clasped her hands. His lipsworked in an ugly, meaningless smile. He stood still a minute, grinnedand went back to the police office.
Ilya Petrovitch had sat down and was rummaging among some papers. Beforehim stood the same peasant who had pushed by on the stairs.
“Hulloa! Back again! have you left something behind? What’s the matter?”
Raskolnikov, with white lips and staring eyes, came slowly nearer.He walked right to the table, leaned his hand on it, tried to saysomething, but could not; only incoherent sounds were audible.
“You are feeling ill, a chair! Here, sit down! Some water!”
Raskolnikov dropped on to a chair, but he kept his eyes fixed on theface of Ilya Petrovitch, which expressed unpleasant surprise. Bothlooked at one another for a minute and waited. Water was brought.
“It was I...” began Raskolnikov.
“Drink some water.”
Raskolnikov refused the water with his hand, and softly and brokenly,but distinctly said:
“_It was I killed the old pawnbroker woman and her sister Lizaveta withan axe and robbed them._”
Ilya Petrovitch opened his mouth. People ran up on all sides.
Raskolnikov repeated his statement.
EPILOGUE
I
Siberia. On the banks of a broad solitary river stands a town, one ofthe administrative centres of Russia; in the town there is a fortress,in the fortress there is a prison. In the prison the second-classconvict Rodion Raskolnikov has been confined for nine months. Almost ayear and a half has passed since his crime.
There had been little difficulty about his trial. The criminal adheredexactly, firmly, and clearly to his statement. He did not confuse normisrepresent the facts, nor soften them in his own interest, nor omitthe smallest detail. He explained every incident of the murder, thesecret of _the pledge_ (the piece of wood with a strip of metal) whichwas found in the murdered woman’s hand. He described minutely how hehad taken her keys, what they were like, as well as the chest and itscontents; he explained the mystery of Lizaveta’s murder; described howKoch and, after him, the student knocked, and repeated all they had saidto one another; how he afterwards had run downstairs and heard Nikolayand Dmitri shouting; how he had hidden in the empty flat and afterwardsgone home. He ended by indicating the stone in the yard off theVoznesensky Prospect under which the purse and the trinkets were found.The whole thing, in fact, was perfectly clear. The lawyers and thejudges were very much struck, among other things, by the fact that hehad hidden the trinkets and the purse under a stone, without makinguse of them, and that, what was more, he did not now remember what thetrinkets were like, or even how many there were. The fact that he hadnever opened the purse and did not even know how much was in it seemedincredible. There turned out to be in the purse three hundred andseventeen roubles and sixty copecks. From being so long under the stone,some of the most valuable notes lying uppermost had suffered from thedamp. They were a long while trying to discover why the accused manshould tell a lie about this, when about everything else he had madea truthful and straightforward confession. Finally some of the lawyersmore versed in psychology admitted that it was possible he had reallynot looked into the purse, and so didn’t know what was in it when hehid it under the stone. But they immediately drew the deduction thatthe crime could only have been committed through temporary mentalderangement, through homicidal mania, without object or the pursuit ofgain. This fell in with the most recent fashionable theory of temporaryinsanity, so often applied in our days in criminal cases. MoreoverRaskolnikov’s hypochondriacal condition was proved by many witnesses, byDr. Zossimov, his former fellow students, his landlady and her servant.All this pointed strongly to the conclusion that Raskolnikov was notquite like an ordinary murderer and robber, but that there was anotherelement in the case.
To the intense annoyance of those who maintained this opinion, thecriminal scarcely attempted to defend himself. To the decisive questionas to what motive impelled him to the murder and the robbery, heanswered very clearly with the coarsest frankness that the cause washis miserable position, his poverty and helplessness, and his desire toprovide for his first steps in life by the help of the three thousandroubles he had reckoned on finding. He had been led to the murderthrough his shallow and cowardly nature, exasperated moreover byprivation and failure. To the question what led him to confess, heanswered that it was his heartfelt repentance. All this was almostcoarse....
The sentence however was more merciful than could have been expected,perhaps partly because the criminal had not tried to justify himself,but had rather shown a desire to exaggerate his guilt. All the strangeand peculiar circumstances of the crime were taken into consideration.There could be no doubt of the abnormal and poverty-stricken conditionof the criminal at the time. The fact that he had made no use of what hehad stolen was put down partly to the effect of remorse, partly to hisabnormal mental condition at the time of the crime. Incidentally themurder of Lizaveta served indeed to confirm the last hypothesis: a mancommits two murders and forgets that the door is open! Finally, theconfession, at the very moment when the case was hopelessly muddled bythe false evidence given by Nikolay through melancholy and fanaticism,and when, moreover, there were no proofs against the real criminal, nosuspicions even (Porfiry Petrovitch fully kept his word)--all this didmuch to soften the sentence. Other circumstances, too, in the prisoner’sfavour came out quite unexpectedly. Razumihin somehow discovered andproved that while Raskolnikov was at the university he had helped a poorconsumptive fellow student and had spent his last penny on supportinghim for six months, and when this student died, leaving a decrepitold father whom he had maintained almost from his thirteenth year,Raskolnikov had got the old man into a hospital and paid for his funeralwhen he died. Raskolnikov’s landlady bore witness, too, that when theyhad lived in another house at Five Corners, Raskolnikov had rescued twolittle children from a house on fire and was burnt in doing so. This wasinvestigated and fairly well confirmed by many witnesses. These factsmade an impression in his favour.
And in the end the criminal was, in consideration of extenuatingcircumstances, condemned to penal servitude in the second class for aterm of eight years only.
At the very beginning of the trial Raskolnikov’s mother fell ill. Douniaand Razumihin found it possible to get her out of Petersburg during thetrial. Razumihin chose a town on the railway not far from Petersburg, soas to be able to follow every step of the trial and at the same timeto see Avdotya Romanovna as often as possible. Pulcheria Alexandrovna’sillness was a strange nervous one and was accompanied by a partialderangement of her intellect.
When Dounia returned from her last interview with her brother, shehad found her mother already ill, in feverish delirium. That eveningRazumihin and she agreed what answers they must make to her mother’squestions about Raskolnikov and made up a complete story for hermother’s benefit of his having to go away to a distant part of Russiaon a business commission, which would bring him in the end money andreputation.
But they were struck by the fact that Pulcheria Alexandrovna neverasked them anything on the subject, neither then nor thereafter. On thecontrary, she had her own version of her son’s sudden departure; shetold them with tears how he had come to say good-bye to her, hintingthat she alone knew many mysterious and important facts, and that Rodyahad many very powerful enemies, so that it was necessary for him to bein hiding. As for his future career, she had no doubt that it would bebrilliant when certain sinister influences could be removed. She assuredRazumihin that her son would be one day a great statesman, that hisarticle and brilliant literary talent proved it. This article she wascontinually reading, she even read it aloud, almost took it to bedwith her, but scarcely asked where Rodya was, though the subject wasobviously avoided by the others, which might have been enough to awakenher suspicions.
They began to be frightened at last at Pulcheria Alexandrovna’s strangesilence on certain subjects. She did not, for instance, complain ofgetting no letters from him, though in previous years she had only livedon the hope of letters from her beloved Rodya. This was the cause ofgreat uneasiness to Dounia; the idea occurred to her that her mothersuspected that there was something terrible in her son’s fate and wasafraid to ask, for fear of hearing something still more awful. In anycase, Dounia saw clearly that her mother was not in full possession ofher faculties.
It happened once or twice, however, that Pulcheria Alexandrovna gavesuch a turn to the conversation that it was impossible to answer herwithout mentioning where Rodya was, and on receiving unsatisfactory andsuspicious answers she became at once gloomy and silent, and this moodlasted for a long time. Dounia saw at last that it was hard to deceiveher and came to the conclusion that it was better to be absolutelysilent on certain points; but it became more and more evident thatthe poor mother suspected something terrible. Dounia remembered herbrother’s telling her that her mother had overheard her talking in hersleep on the night after her interview with Svidrigaïlov and before thefatal day of the confession: had not she made out something from that?Sometimes days and even weeks of gloomy silence and tears would besucceeded by a period of hysterical animation, and the invalid wouldbegin to talk almost incessantly of her son, of her hopes of hisfuture.... Her fancies were sometimes very strange. They humoured her,pretended to agree with her (she saw perhaps that they were pretending),but she still went on talking.
Five months after Raskolnikov’s confession, he was sentenced. Razumihinand Sonia saw him in prison as often as it was possible. At lastthe moment of separation came. Dounia swore to her brother that theseparation should not be for ever, Razumihin did the same. Razumihin, inhis youthful ardour, had firmly resolved to lay the foundations at leastof a secure livelihood during the next three or four years, and savingup a certain sum, to emigrate to Siberia, a country rich in everynatural resource and in need of workers, active men and capital. Therethey would settle in the town where Rodya was and all together wouldbegin a new life. They all wept at parting.
Raskolnikov had been very dreamy for a few days before. He asked a greatdeal about his mother and was constantly anxious about her. He worriedso much about her that it alarmed Dounia. When he heard about hismother’s illness he became very gloomy. With Sonia he was particularlyreserved all the time. With the help of the money left to her bySvidrigaïlov, Sonia had long ago made her preparations to follow theparty of convicts in which he was despatched to Siberia. Not a wordpassed between Raskolnikov and her on the subject, but both knew itwould be so. At the final leave-taking he smiled strangely at hissister’s and Razumihin’s fervent anticipations of their happy futuretogether when he should come out of prison. He predicted that theirmother’s illness would soon have a fatal ending. Sonia and he at lastset off.
Two months later Dounia was married to Razumihin. It was a quiet andsorrowful wedding; Porfiry Petrovitch and Zossimov were invited however.During all this period Razumihin wore an air of resolute determination.Dounia put implicit faith in his carrying out his plans and indeed shecould not but believe in him. He displayed a rare strength of will.Among other things he began attending university lectures again in orderto take his degree. They were continually making plans for the future;both counted on settling in Siberia within five years at least. Tillthen they rested their hopes on Sonia.
Pulcheria Alexandrovna was delighted to give her blessing to Dounia’smarriage with Razumihin; but after the marriage she became even moremelancholy and anxious. To give her pleasure Razumihin told her howRaskolnikov had looked after the poor student and his decrepit fatherand how a year ago he had been burnt and injured in rescuing twolittle children from a fire. These two pieces of news excited PulcheriaAlexandrovna’s disordered imagination almost to ecstasy. She wascontinually talking about them, even entering into conversation withstrangers in the street, though Dounia always accompanied her. In publicconveyances and shops, wherever she could capture a listener, she wouldbegin the discourse about her son, his article, how he had helped thestudent, how he had been burnt at the fire, and so on! Dounia didnot know how to restrain her. Apart from the danger of her morbidexcitement, there was the risk of someone’s recalling Raskolnikov’s nameand speaking of the recent trial. Pulcheria Alexandrovna found out theaddress of the mother of the two children her son had saved and insistedon going to see her.
At last her restlessness reached an extreme point. She would sometimesbegin to cry suddenly and was often ill and feverishly delirious. Onemorning she declared that by her reckoning Rodya ought soon to be home,that she remembered when he said good-bye to her he said that they mustexpect him back in nine months. She began to prepare for his coming,began to do up her room for him, to clean the furniture, to wash andput up new hangings and so on. Dounia was anxious, but said nothing andhelped her to arrange the room. After a fatiguing day spent in continualfancies, in joyful day-dreams and tears, Pulcheria Alexandrovna wastaken ill in the night and by morning she was feverish and delirious.It was brain fever. She died within a fortnight. In her delirium shedropped words which showed that she knew a great deal more about herson’s terrible fate than they had supposed.
For a long time Raskolnikov did not know of his mother’s death, thougha regular correspondence had been maintained from the time he reachedSiberia. It was carried on by means of Sonia, who wrote every monthto the Razumihins and received an answer with unfailing regularity. Atfirst they found Sonia’s letters dry and unsatisfactory, but later onthey came to the conclusion that the letters could not be better, forfrom these letters they received a complete picture of their unfortunatebrother’s life. Sonia’s letters were full of the most matter-of-factdetail, the simplest and clearest description of all Raskolnikov’ssurroundings as a convict. There was no word of her own hopes, noconjecture as to the future, no description of her feelings. Instead ofany attempt to interpret his state of mind and inner life, she gave thesimple facts--that is, his own words, an exact account of his health,what he asked for at their interviews, what commission he gave herand so on. All these facts she gave with extraordinary minuteness. Thepicture of their unhappy brother stood out at last with great clearnessand precision. There could be no mistake, because nothing was given butfacts.
But Dounia and her husband could get little comfort out of the news,especially at first. Sonia wrote that he was constantly sullen and notready to talk, that he scarcely seemed interested in the news she gavehim from their letters, that he sometimes asked after his mother andthat when, seeing that he had guessed the truth, she told him at lastof her death, she was surprised to find that he did not seem greatlyaffected by it, not externally at any rate. She told them that, althoughhe seemed so wrapped up in himself and, as it were, shut himself offfrom everyone--he took a very direct and simple view of his new life;that he understood his position, expected nothing better for the time,had no ill-founded hopes (as is so common in his position) and scarcelyseemed surprised at anything in his surroundings, so unlike anything hehad known before. She wrote that his health was satisfactory; he did hiswork without shirking or seeking to do more; he was almost indifferentabout food, but except on Sundays and holidays the food was so bad thatat last he had been glad to accept some money from her, Sonia, to havehis own tea every day. He begged her not to trouble about anything else,declaring that all this fuss about him only annoyed him. Sonia wrotefurther that in prison he shared the same room with the rest, that shehad not seen the inside of their barracks, but concluded that they werecrowded, miserable and unhealthy; that he slept on a plank bed with arug under him and was unwilling to make any other arrangement. But thathe lived so poorly and roughly, not from any plan or design, but simplyfrom inattention and indifference.
Sonia wrote simply that he had at first shown no interest in her visits,had almost been vexed with her indeed for coming, unwilling to talk andrude to her. But that in the end these visits had become a habit andalmost a necessity for him, so that he was positively distressed whenshe was ill for some days and could not visit him. She used to see himon holidays at the prison gates or in the guard-room, to which he wasbrought for a few minutes to see her. On working days she would go tosee him at work either at the workshops or at the brick kilns, or at thesheds on the banks of the Irtish.
About herself, Sonia wrote that she had succeeded in making someacquaintances in the town, that she did sewing, and, as therewas scarcely a dressmaker in the town, she was looked upon as anindispensable person in many houses. But she did not mention that theauthorities were, through her, interested in Raskolnikov; that his taskwas lightened and so on.
At last the news came (Dounia had indeed noticed signs of alarm anduneasiness in the preceding letters) that he held aloof from everyone,that his fellow prisoners did not like him, that he kept silent for daysat a time and was becoming very pale. In the last letter Sonia wrotethat he had been taken very seriously ill and was in the convict ward ofthe hospital.
II
He was ill a long time. But it was not the horrors of prison life, notthe hard labour, the bad food, the shaven head, or the patched clothesthat crushed him. What did he care for all those trials and hardships!he was even glad of the hard work. Physically exhausted, he could atleast reckon on a few hours of quiet sleep. And what was the food tohim--the thin cabbage soup with beetles floating in it? In the past as astudent he had often not had even that. His clothes were warm and suitedto his manner of life. He did not even feel the fetters. Was he ashamedof his shaven head and parti-coloured coat? Before whom? Before Sonia?Sonia was afraid of him, how could he be ashamed before her? And yet hewas ashamed even before Sonia, whom he tortured because of it withhis contemptuous rough manner. But it was not his shaven head and hisfetters he was ashamed of: his pride had been stung to the quick. It waswounded pride that made him ill. Oh, how happy he would have been if hecould have blamed himself! He could have borne anything then, evenshame and disgrace. But he judged himself severely, and his exasperatedconscience found no particularly terrible fault in his past, excepta simple _blunder_ which might happen to anyone. He was ashamed justbecause he, Raskolnikov, had so hopelessly, stupidly come to griefthrough some decree of blind fate, and must humble himself and submit to“the idiocy” of a sentence, if he were anyhow to be at peace.
Vague and objectless anxiety in the present, and in the future acontinual sacrifice leading to nothing--that was all that lay beforehim. And what comfort was it to him that at the end of eight years hewould only be thirty-two and able to begin a new life! What had he tolive for? What had he to look forward to? Why should he strive? To livein order to exist? Why, he had been ready a thousand times before togive up existence for the sake of an idea, for a hope, even for a fancy.Mere existence had always been too little for him; he had always wantedmore. Perhaps it was just because of the strength of his desires that hehad thought himself a man to whom more was permissible than to others.
And if only fate would have sent him repentance--burning repentance thatwould have torn his heart and robbed him of sleep, that repentance, theawful agony of which brings visions of hanging or drowning! Oh, he wouldhave been glad of it! Tears and agonies would at least have been life.But he did not repent of his crime.
At least he might have found relief in raging at his stupidity, as hehad raged at the grotesque blunders that had brought him to prison.But now in prison, _in freedom_, he thought over and criticised all hisactions again and by no means found them so blundering and so grotesqueas they had seemed at the fatal time.
“In what way,” he asked himself, “was my theory stupider than othersthat have swarmed and clashed from the beginning of the world? One hasonly to look at the thing quite independently, broadly, and uninfluencedby commonplace ideas, and my idea will by no means seem so... strange.Oh, sceptics and halfpenny philosophers, why do you halt half-way!
“Why does my action strike them as so horrible?” he said to himself. “Isit because it was a crime? What is meant by crime? My conscience is atrest. Of course, it was a legal crime, of course, the letter of the lawwas broken and blood was shed. Well, punish me for the letter of thelaw... and that’s enough. Of course, in that case many of thebenefactors of mankind who snatched power for themselves instead ofinheriting it ought to have been punished at their first steps. Butthose men succeeded and so _they were right_, and I didn’t, and so Ihad no right to have taken that step.”
It was only in that that he recognised his criminality, only in the factthat he had been unsuccessful and had confessed it.
He suffered too from the question: why had he not killed himself? Whyhad he stood looking at the river and preferred to confess? Was thedesire to live so strong and was it so hard to overcome it? Had notSvidrigaïlov overcome it, although he was afraid of death?
In misery he asked himself this question, and could not understand that,at the very time he had been standing looking into the river, he hadperhaps been dimly conscious of the fundamental falsity in himself andhis convictions. He didn’t understand that that consciousness might bethe promise of a future crisis, of a new view of life and of his futureresurrection.
He preferred to attribute it to the dead weight of instinct which hecould not step over, again through weakness and meanness. He looked athis fellow prisoners and was amazed to see how they all loved life andprized it. It seemed to him that they loved and valued life more inprison than in freedom. What terrible agonies and privations some ofthem, the tramps for instance, had endured! Could they care so much fora ray of sunshine, for the primeval forest, the cold spring hidden awayin some unseen spot, which the tramp had marked three years before, andlonged to see again, as he might to see his sweetheart, dreaming of thegreen grass round it and the bird singing in the bush? As he went on hesaw still more inexplicable examples.
In prison, of course, there was a great deal he did not see and did notwant to see; he lived as it were with downcast eyes. It was loathsomeand unbearable for him to look. But in the end there was much thatsurprised him and he began, as it were involuntarily, to notice muchthat he had not suspected before. What surprised him most of all wasthe terrible impossible gulf that lay between him and all the rest. Theyseemed to be a different species, and he looked at them and they athim with distrust and hostility. He felt and knew the reasons of hisisolation, but he would never have admitted till then that those reasonswere so deep and strong. There were some Polish exiles, politicalprisoners, among them. They simply looked down upon all the rest asignorant churls; but Raskolnikov could not look upon them like that.He saw that these ignorant men were in many respects far wiser than thePoles. There were some Russians who were just as contemptuous, a formerofficer and two seminarists. Raskolnikov saw their mistake as clearly.He was disliked and avoided by everyone; they even began to hate him atlast--why, he could not tell. Men who had been far more guilty despisedand laughed at his crime.
“You’re a gentleman,” they used to say. “You shouldn’t hack about withan axe; that’s not a gentleman’s work.”
The second week in Lent, his turn came to take the sacrament with hisgang. He went to church and prayed with the others. A quarrel broke outone day, he did not know how. All fell on him at once in a fury.
“You’re an infidel! You don’t believe in God,” they shouted. “You oughtto be killed.”
He had never talked to them about God nor his belief, but they wanted tokill him as an infidel. He said nothing. One of the prisoners rushed athim in a perfect frenzy. Raskolnikov awaited him calmly and silently;his eyebrows did not quiver, his face did not flinch. The guardsucceeded in intervening between him and his assailant, or there wouldhave been bloodshed.
There was another question he could not decide: why were they all sofond of Sonia? She did not try to win their favour; she rarely metthem, sometimes only she came to see him at work for a moment. And yeteverybody knew her, they knew that she had come out to follow _him_,knew how and where she lived. She never gave them money, did them noparticular services. Only once at Christmas she sent them all presentsof pies and rolls. But by degrees closer relations sprang up betweenthem and Sonia. She would write and post letters for them to theirrelations. Relations of the prisoners who visited the town, at theirinstructions, left with Sonia presents and money for them. Their wivesand sweethearts knew her and used to visit her. And when she visitedRaskolnikov at work, or met a party of the prisoners on the road, theyall took off their hats to her. “Little mother Sofya Semyonovna, youare our dear, good little mother,” coarse branded criminals said to thatfrail little creature. She would smile and bow to them and everyone wasdelighted when she smiled. They even admired her gait and turned roundto watch her walking; they admired her too for being so little, and, infact, did not know what to admire her most for. They even came to herfor help in their illnesses.
He was in the hospital from the middle of Lent till after Easter. Whenhe was better, he remembered the dreams he had had while he was feverishand delirious. He dreamt that the whole world was condemned to aterrible new strange plague that had come to Europe from the depths ofAsia. All were to be destroyed except a very few chosen. Some new sortsof microbes were attacking the bodies of men, but these microbes wereendowed with intelligence and will. Men attacked by them became at oncemad and furious. But never had men considered themselves so intellectualand so completely in possession of the truth as these sufferers, neverhad they considered their decisions, their scientific conclusions, theirmoral convictions so infallible. Whole villages, whole towns and peopleswent mad from the infection. All were excited and did not understandone another. Each thought that he alone had the truth and was wretchedlooking at the others, beat himself on the breast, wept, and wrunghis hands. They did not know how to judge and could not agree what toconsider evil and what good; they did not know whom to blame, whomto justify. Men killed each other in a sort of senseless spite. Theygathered together in armies against one another, but even on the marchthe armies would begin attacking each other, the ranks would be brokenand the soldiers would fall on each other, stabbing and cutting, bitingand devouring each other. The alarm bell was ringing all day long inthe towns; men rushed together, but why they were summoned and who wassummoning them no one knew. The most ordinary trades were abandoned,because everyone proposed his own ideas, his own improvements, and theycould not agree. The land too was abandoned. Men met in groups, agreedon something, swore to keep together, but at once began on somethingquite different from what they had proposed. They accused one another,fought and killed each other. There were conflagrations and famine. Allmen and all things were involved in destruction. The plague spread andmoved further and further. Only a few men could be saved in the wholeworld. They were a pure chosen people, destined to found a new race anda new life, to renew and purify the earth, but no one had seen thesemen, no one had heard their words and their voices.
Raskolnikov was worried that this senseless dream haunted his memory somiserably, the impression of this feverish delirium persisted so long.The second week after Easter had come. There were warm bright springdays; in the prison ward the grating windows under which the sentinelpaced were opened. Sonia had only been able to visit him twice duringhis illness; each time she had to obtain permission, and it wasdifficult. But she often used to come to the hospital yard, especiallyin the evening, sometimes only to stand a minute and look up at thewindows of the ward.
One evening, when he was almost well again, Raskolnikov fell asleep. Onwaking up he chanced to go to the window, and at once saw Sonia in thedistance at the hospital gate. She seemed to be waiting for someone.Something stabbed him to the heart at that minute. He shuddered andmoved away from the window. Next day Sonia did not come, nor the dayafter; he noticed that he was expecting her uneasily. At last he wasdischarged. On reaching the prison he learnt from the convicts thatSofya Semyonovna was lying ill at home and was unable to go out.
He was very uneasy and sent to inquire after her; he soon learnt thather illness was not dangerous. Hearing that he was anxious about her,Sonia sent him a pencilled note, telling him that she was much better,that she had a slight cold and that she would soon, very soon come andsee him at his work. His heart throbbed painfully as he read it.
Again it was a warm bright day. Early in the morning, at six o’clock, hewent off to work on the river bank, where they used to pound alabasterand where there was a kiln for baking it in a shed. There were onlythree of them sent. One of the convicts went with the guard to thefortress to fetch a tool; the other began getting the wood ready andlaying it in the kiln. Raskolnikov came out of the shed on to the riverbank, sat down on a heap of logs by the shed and began gazing at thewide deserted river. From the high bank a broad landscape opened beforehim, the sound of singing floated faintly audible from the other bank.In the vast steppe, bathed in sunshine, he could just see, like blackspecks, the nomads’ tents. There there was freedom, there other men wereliving, utterly unlike those here; there time itself seemed to standstill, as though the age of Abraham and his flocks had not passed.Raskolnikov sat gazing, his thoughts passed into day-dreams, intocontemplation; he thought of nothing, but a vague restlessness excitedand troubled him. Suddenly he found Sonia beside him; she had come upnoiselessly and sat down at his side. It was still quite early; themorning chill was still keen. She wore her poor old burnous and thegreen shawl; her face still showed signs of illness, it was thinner andpaler. She gave him a joyful smile of welcome, but held out her handwith her usual timidity. She was always timid of holding out her handto him and sometimes did not offer it at all, as though afraid he wouldrepel it. He always took her hand as though with repugnance, alwaysseemed vexed to meet her and was sometimes obstinately silent throughouther visit. Sometimes she trembled before him and went away deeplygrieved. But now their hands did not part. He stole a rapid glanceat her and dropped his eyes on the ground without speaking. They werealone, no one had seen them. The guard had turned away for the time.
How it happened he did not know. But all at once something seemed toseize him and fling him at her feet. He wept and threw his arms roundher knees. For the first instant she was terribly frightened and sheturned pale. She jumped up and looked at him trembling. But at the samemoment she understood, and a light of infinite happiness came into hereyes. She knew and had no doubt that he loved her beyond everything andthat at last the moment had come....
They wanted to speak, but could not; tears stood in their eyes. Theywere both pale and thin; but those sick pale faces were bright with thedawn of a new future, of a full resurrection into a new life. They wererenewed by love; the heart of each held infinite sources of life for theheart of the other.
They resolved to wait and be patient. They had another seven years towait, and what terrible suffering and what infinite happiness beforethem! But he had risen again and he knew it and felt it in all hisbeing, while she--she only lived in his life.
On the evening of the same day, when the barracks were locked,Raskolnikov lay on his plank bed and thought of her. He had even fanciedthat day that all the convicts who had been his enemies looked at himdifferently; he had even entered into talk with them and they answeredhim in a friendly way. He remembered that now, and thought it was boundto be so. Wasn’t everything now bound to be changed?
He thought of her. He remembered how continually he had tormented herand wounded her heart. He remembered her pale and thin little face.But these recollections scarcely troubled him now; he knew with whatinfinite love he would now repay all her sufferings. And what were all,_all_ the agonies of the past! Everything, even his crime, his sentenceand imprisonment, seemed to him now in the first rush of feeling anexternal, strange fact with which he had no concern. But he could notthink for long together of anything that evening, and he could not haveanalysed anything consciously; he was simply feeling. Life had steppedinto the place of theory and something quite different would work itselfout in his mind.
Under his pillow lay the New Testament. He took it up mechanically.The book belonged to Sonia; it was the one from which she had read theraising of Lazarus to him. At first he was afraid that she would worryhim about religion, would talk about the gospel and pester him withbooks. But to his great surprise she had not once approached the subjectand had not even offered him the Testament. He had asked her for ithimself not long before his illness and she brought him the book withouta word. Till now he had not opened it.
He did not open it now, but one thought passed through his mind: “Canher convictions not be mine now? Her feelings, her aspirations atleast....”
She too had been greatly agitated that day, and at night she was takenill again. But she was so happy--and so unexpectedly happy--that she wasalmost frightened of her happiness. Seven years, _only_ seven years! Atthe beginning of their happiness at some moments they were both readyto look on those seven years as though they were seven days. He did notknow that the new life would not be given him for nothing, that he wouldhave to pay dearly for it, that it would cost him great striving, greatsuffering.
But that is the beginning of a new story--the story of the gradualrenewal of a man, the story of his gradual regeneration, of his passingfrom one world into another, of his initiation into a new unknown life.That might be the subject of a new story, but our present story isended.
